I was intrigued with this recipe from foolishpoolish http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/7433/brioche-au-levain-recipe and also had been poking through my Baking with Julia book and noticed that Julia does her brioche in the mixer.  Well if it's good enough for Julia Child, it's good enough for me.  I modified the recipe, added Orange Blossom water and it came out great.  (A little more orange blossom than I would have liked, it smells like eating flowers,) but the taste is great and the crumb is soft and fluffy, just like it should be. Next time I'll try it the purist way (no flavoring) I think I'll be happier. My 14 month grand daughter couldn't get enough! Crumb shot: Starter:100g AP flour50G water50 g active starter (100% Hydration)Let sit about 5 hoursMix:200 g AP flour80g sugar7g salt3 eggs, plus one yolkto form a shaggy dough, sprinkle with 200g all purpose flour and wait for the top to appear cracked. About 30 minutes.Mix:15 g Orange Flower Water85 g milkStarterIn the bowl of a stand mixer add starter mixture to dough mixture. Mix on low speed until just incorporated.  Turn speed up to Medium and let mix for 15 minutes until the dough wraps around the hook and slaps the side of the bowl.Work 150g butter until it is about the same consistency as the dough. Add the butter to the dough while running at low speed about 2 tbl at a time. When all the butter has been added increase speed to medium and run the mixer until the dough comes back together and slaps the side of the bowl again.Transfer to a buttered bowl and let it rise until doubled.Deflate the dough slightly in the bowl and cover tightly and refrigerate overnightDivide in two, shape each piece into 6 balls and place into loaf pans. Two rows of 3.  Spray a piece of plastic wrap with coconut oil (what I have) and cover pans. Let rise until doubled at room temperature. this took about 5 hours for me.Preheat oven to 375dFBrush with 1 egg beaten with about a t/l of water,  quickly slash tops of the balls with scissors. Bake 375 dF  about 30  minutes or internal temp of 200dF.
Here is the link to my recipe, as requested by bread1965 https://www.dropbox.com/s/418xctpf74nxnrh/Multigrain%20loaf.xlsx?dl=0 Starter was refreshed for the Experimentation - the next step bake (posted on 17th January)  so I had allowed sufficient for this bake as well. Levain was built the night before and left at room temperature until 13:25 pm Soaker was mixed the night before as well.  I use boiling water, add the salt, mix and allow to cool before refrigerating overnight.  It was removed from refrigerator mid morning. 12:25 pm The remaining water was added to the soaker and this added to the bread flour, wholewheat (freshly milled), and gluten flour . This was mixed until all ingredients were incorporated then left 1 hour to autolyse. 13:25 pm  The levain was dimpled in and incorporated using stretch and folds.  At this point I realised I had forgotten to add the honey, which I usually add with the water.  I spread it out over the dough and carried on with stretch and folds. I didn't count how many but until everything is well mixed in.   Yes, this is a wet mix but not unmanageable. 13:55 pm first set of 10 stretch and folds in bowl as per Trevor J Wilson's method 14:35 pm 2nd set of 10 stretch and folds 15:15 pm 3rd set of 10 stretch and folds 17:00 pm 4th set of stretch and folds.  left to relax 17:30 pm removed dough from bowl, divided into two pieces and preshaped into batard 18:00 pm  Final shaping into batards, into floured bannetons, popped into ziplock bags and place in refrigerator overnight. Next morning, oven preheated along with my 2 DOs to 250 deg C. Dough removed from fridge, unmoulded onto parchment, slashed and dropped into hot DOs.  Baked 15 mins lid on and 15 mins lid off.  Temperature was reduced to 230 deg C about 10 minutes into bake otherwise I get singeing on the bottom. It was a good bake.  In past I would probably tried slap and folds, but I am getting good results with this more gentle method. Leslie
My first bake of 2018. I'm glad I squeezed in a bake despite my busy schedule. I find it more therapeutic than ever! :) Last time, I baked bagels and I really loved them because they were so satisfying to eat. Due to the boiling process it gets before being baked, they really have a unique texture. I thought it will be similar to laugenbrot with a thick chewy crust but I was wrong. Its thin and crispy crust is also our favorite to date but my parents find the crumb too chewy for them so I thought of why not soften the crumb a little bit and maintain that unique crust.I originally planned to use my bagel dough and just add a little butter and a little more water to soften the crumb a little but I made some more improvisations along the way. I had 2 leftover egg yolks from another recipe so I added that to the dough so I won't have to store it anymore. :) I added more sugar because our favorite yeasted sandwich loaf is a bit sweet and because the egg yolks are added fat and richness I halved the amount of butter I scooped for the dough.A high sugar dough seems to be an uncharted territory for Zhou Clementine, my starter. She was a bit slow in raising the dough. Bulk fermentation took 4 hours but the dough only grew to 1.5 times instead of doubling. I folded the dough into a neat rectangle and put it into a sort of rectangular container then into the fridge after a further 2 hours at room temperature. The dough did not grew much in the fridge as shown in the picture.German square brotchen have always fascinated me through the years, I find their shape simply adorable. :) I love square-shaped breads including donut plant's square jelly donut in NYC although I still haven't had the chance to try it. I have only done a square fried bread but never a square "baked" bread so that's what I did here. Since it is not shaped, proofing times might be different so I followed Karin's (Hanseata) schedule here for similar rolls.The dough was simply tipped onto a cutting board; edges trimmed; and cut into 4 pieces. I braided the trimmed edges as to not waste anything and fashioned it into a roll. I proofed them for an hour because they came straight form the fridge.Here they are after proofing. The photo does not show much of a difference but if you look closely you can see shallower and softer lines as opposed to deep defined hard line before proofing, they also have increased a bit in height.I think they do not need any proofing at all. They are already so soft and stretchy and bit sticky by the end and I mangled them a bit during the boiling process. Next time I will boil them right away after cutting and they will have a much better shape and spring. They look a bit small but they doubled during boiling and doubled again during baking so they increased in size by a total of 4 times.I think that pre-gelatinizing crust during the boiling process that is the key to the bagel crust that we really love so I also boiled these rolls 1 minute on each side to achieve the same results. The wetter enriched dough did not disintegrate in the water as opposed to common knowledge explaining why bagel dough is supposed to be dry. I think its drier dough is for the chewy texture. They look a bit sad and ugly after boiling but they were transformed by the dry heat of the clay pot.They were baked over heated pebbles in the clay pot for 10 minutes then flipped and baked again for another 10 minutes; 20 minutes in total with live fire.Only one got a bit burnt but I do not know why all look like they have burnt spots but they were just very boldly bake areas and do not look black in real life.They were very fragrant coming out of the pot with a tangy smell and a touch of smoke and an extra buttery aroma. The crust was very crispy with a delicate feel to it and the crumb was soft with a very slight chew. The taste was complex; buttery, slightly sugary sweet with the barest hint of tang. Very good on its own or with fillings, so far we only had cheese in the house so that's what we used. Out of excitement we cut them while still hot so the crumb was still a bit wet and has not set-up completely. My parents really loved them because they don't have to fight them with their jaws but still has that lovely crisp crust like the last time.Finally, I am loving the new way to upload pictures here on TFL. It's so much easier! Again, thanks Floyd!Some more random photos of the rolls including the braided one. :) Now that I know that boiling is the secret for the crust that we like, I will now manipulate the crumb to make it lighter of heavier depending on our preference. I'm excited for future experiments for "boiled" rolls! I hope you enjoyed this post. Thank you and Happy Baking!
Oh my....that's about all I can say. The blue granite roaster is definitely the way to go , at least I will not be using my cast iron anymore. Look at that ear :) and caramelization.  I had extra ripe bananas and I remembered posts from Shiao - ping and txfarmer using bananas and SD. I read and read and came up with a formula. I have several more I am going to try as I get more bananas. The date syrup is from a Middle Eastern grocery in Las Vegas NV. That plus the bananas really make the crust darken but not burn. Smells like I was making candy caramels ! 244g rye levain 100% 220g unbleached flour 45g rye flour freshly milled 55 g Spring hard wheat flour 245g very ripe pureed bananas 35g date syrup + 35g yogurt 9 g salt a very wet and sticky dough. Tried folds in the bowl and that worked well. Only way I could do them on the table was with additional flour. Finally called it good and put the dough to bed in the cool mudroom. After 4 hrs it was light but not even 50%. Went ahead and shaped in my own fold/pinch/method and placed in banneton in mud room. After 4 hrs it looked good so I put it in the fridge and went to bed. Preheated oven at 500 with the roaster in the oven. Baked loaf 10 min at 500 lid on and 10 min at 475 lid on. Baked 20 min at 475 lid off. Perfect. Can't get over the spring achieved with the granite wear . Holds in the moisture, quick to preheat pot, not heavy to transfer and can easily bake successive loaves due to fast turnaround. I'm sold .
Love this bread but I have a few questions for anyone out there who regularly bakes this delicacy. Nigella seeds in with flour at the beginning or sprinkled on during shaping? Butter, margarine or olive oil to enrich the dough during shaping? Saffron to colour the dough yellow or not? Bake hot & fast or cooler and more slowly with a lid? Enrich the dough with egg & butter or not? Egg wash to finish with a shine or not?
how often can a person make and eat pizza before they get tired of it ?  Apparently a LOT !!  I wanted to see how this dough would do after X days in a plastic bag in the fridge. The answer is wonderfully. Very  much improved flavor profile and great holes !!  I used some of my chef son's sweet Italian sausage and it really added to the flavor. Same mode of operation as far as the rest of it. Layered sliced provolone on the bottom crust after it had risen for a while on the stove top. I made sure a put plenty of EVOO in the skillet before I laid the dough in. I stretched it a bit and then went away. When I came back it was nicely puffy. I dimpled and pulled it a bit and then  Layered sliced provolone on the bottom crust . Topped with sauteed red onions and red pepper and then the sausage. Next was crumbled feta and then torn fresh mozzerella. Into a preheated 500 oven for 20 min. Took it out and drizzled the seasoned tomato sauce and then grated parm. In the oven again for 10 min or so still 500.
A fabulous and incredibly informative set of email exchanges on Mariana’s part a few weeks ago had me: I ran the wonderful and wonderfully reliable Hamelman Vermont SD formula 3 consecutive times over 2 weeks.  I’ve baked this enough times, now always using a rye levain vs. his white flour levain.  And I'm certain that I can reproduce it with consistency time and again.   All activities were the same across the 3 bakes with just one major exception each time. Although I gave away the pick of each litter, I warehoused 1 from each of the first 2 bakes.  Here are the 3 results side by side.  The club-ended baguette was the pure hand mix, and the center baguette was the stand mixer batch. In summary, I didn’t see a lot of difference, other than mix time among the three mixes, although even with a good oven spring, the food processor batch had what seem to be a more regular crumb with smaller holes.
It looks and smells grand and I will get to cut this open to have a peek at the crumb before letting the daughter take it away or have it delivered by Dad.
the banana rye date and pecan bread made it to the iron skillet this morning! My maple syrup comes from a friends trees in Wisconsin. He taps each Spring. Delicious.
The dough is the Tartine Basic Country Bread. The formula of the polenta bread can be found in Tartine Bread (page 93). I added pumpkin seeds, corn oil, fresh rosemary and blue corn polenta instead of the usual variety. It follows a similar approach as the porridge breads in Tartine Book #3 by using a polenta soaker. The soaker was too wet. Nothing that can't be fixed by dehydrating it in the oven until it becomes more like a paste. Another change I made to the Tartine method was an overnight cold retard in the fridge during bulk rise. The result is quite stunning. The beauty of the bread surprises me: the painterly brush strokes flowing through the crumb, contrasting nicely with the shatteringly light crust.
So last week I jumped for joy at getting some great spring and 'honeycomb' on my croissants and of course imparted as much of the experience as possible (since that's what TFL is all about ... ie sharing experiences).  The last thought of that post was 'can it be reproduced?' - so far not entirely.  This week seemed on track but in retrospect the lack of same degree of spring I think can be attributed to hydration.  I pushed hydration an extra 5% and noticed great extensibility, which btw, is a bit challenging with this kind of dough.  This week I pulled back a bit and immediately noticed the dough was a bit tougher, not necessarily resistant but sort of well, dry and lethargic.  The other thing I noticed last week was very slow bulk rise which usually with bread I see as a positive characteristic for acheiving open crumb (I'm a firm believer that less gas helps the bubbles expand with less competition from other gas pockets).  All steps this time were suggesting that we were not heading in the same direction as last week and the results corroborate this observation.  That is, not as exaggerated spring and impressive crumb. That's not to say that this is necessarily a bad batch, it's ok, the crumb is just doesn't have that wow factor (all y'all know what I mean by that...ie, the anticipation of cutting your creation open).  So lesson learned, go with the gut, I should have returned the dough and re-hydrated...I friggen knew it after mixing, it didn't have the same stickyness as last week.  Well, there it is - failure leads to learning.  One good thing they always taste pretty good ;)
I had bit and pieces of dried fruit leftover from the holidays and I also had some local made grain free spiced granola that I had bought at the farmer’s market. The granola was rather expensive and there wasn’t a lot of it so I added the dried fruit and toasted groats to boost the volume of the add-ins. I am also continuing to sift the bran out of the whole grain flour that I mill and use that for the levain. The bran gets used for the first couple stages of levain building and I take some of the unbleached flour from the recipe to make up the rest of the amount needed. I suppose I could take some from the whole grain flour I just milled and sifted but using unbleached flour seems to make my starter very happy. Recipe: 250 g freshly milled red fife flour 50 g freshly milled buckwheat flour 650 g unbleached flour 150 g multigrain flour 50 g freshly ground flax seed 66 g grain free spiced granola 75 g dried currants 44 g dried cherries 33 g dried chopped apricots 20 g pink himalayan salt 700 g water 100 g buckwheat groats boiling water to soak groats 50 g kefir 240 g of 80% levain (see instructions below) Not the best oven spring but they still look good. They were in the fridge for 17 hours so I wonder if that affected the oven spring.
Abel Sierra posted another in his series of fascinating outside-of-the-box things that one can do with just Flour Water and Salt two weeks ago.  And I am indeed fascinated at the breadth of what one can do creatively with just these three ingredients.   And that also meant another that I would warehouse until the time came.  Which was now! The character of the baked bread is really wonderful.  It has a thin and crisp snap to the crust while the crumb is tender and sweet.  A really nice bread in every measure. This is a 100% hydration liquid levain, 75% overall hydration mix that uses a full 50% of the flour in the levain pre-ferment.  Which is somewhat off the charts considering the "normal" range is in the 5%-20% vicinity.  But that is what caught my eye.  Although this is an all white flour affair, a very small number of grams of WW and rye snuck in due to my base starter having these two rogue elements. The dough is incredibly slack and stayed that way throughout the entire process.  Because of this I had a fair amount of trouble wrangling the dough to form baguettes, with them becoming somewhat inconsistent and misshapen, but managed to get a decent enough shape and subsequent bake.  The batard was a cinch to shape. Where I differed from Abel in the process was to shorten the bulk rise with two S&Fs to his one, and to retard until the next day rather than execute the entire process in a single calendar day as Abel stated he did. My follow-up attempt will be to change two things and see whether that will yield some improvements in the shaping as well as to provide a more robust flavor - without sacrificing any of the clean AP taste.  The plan is to do an 85% AP / 15% Rye flour mix with all of the rye incorporated into the levain.  As for shaping, instead of my standard pre-shape logs, the next time will have me pre-shape as small boules, and I think that this will facilitate with the rolling of the baguettes. Thanks Abel. 500g x 1 batard 350g x 2 baguettes/long batards
I found pul's bread and was hooked! but persimmon??? ok, I got no persimmon but my wife got fresh kaki and I dryed them cut into wedges. so I have pieces of wedges in the bread and no cubes! never mind! ;-) this bread is absolut gorgeous! the loaf shaped as boule crust detail crumb crumb detail, walnuts, cranberries, persimmon detail crumb-crust blisters on the crust my formula absolutely delicious! thx pul! happy baking rudi
My first blog entry! I have been wanting to bake my version of dmsnyder's excellent bread.  I prepared and baked as below, and I am delighted with the result. I started with my usual 2 loaf sourdough recipe, adjusted the flours and add-in to match dmsnyder's recipe.: Day 1: 10:00 pm Prepare levain: Soak raisins: Day 2: Prepare dough 8:30 Mix and autolyse Walnuts: toast 192 gr. in a skillet on medium heat.  Stir frequently as they will quickly go from nicely fragrant to burnt!  Chop coarsely after they cool. 9:15: Add final ingredients: 10:00: 1st stretch and fold 10:45 2nd stretch and fold 11:30 3rd stretch and fold 12:15 4th stretch and fold (optional, based upon the strength of your dough, etc.) 2:00: Preshape 2:30 Final shaping Day 3: Baking Enjoy!
Due to long class hours, my lunch of rice and a viand cannot sustain me until dinner or until I get home. Halfway through the class after lunch, I am already starting to feel drained and lethargic and starting lose focus. Since bagels are a recent favorite and I know how satisfying and filling they are, I baked some to serve as an afternoon snack to fuel me and give some badly needed energy. :)I used the same bagel dough as my New Year's Eve bagels (bread flour, water, starter, salt, sugar, honey) with only one change: I increased the sugar to more than double because I like the taste better and for more fuel.Bulk rise took 4 hours at 27°C. I shortened it to 4 hours as opposed 6 hours because the dough became too extensible and very sticky to handle the last time. I know now that my starter is not a real fan of raising high-sugar doughs. The rise was slow and the dough barely doubled, it only grew to about 1.5x its size.I cut the dough into 3 ropes instead of 6 for bigger more satisfying bagels and for the convenience of only having to bake a single batch of delicious bagels. I prefer to shape them by looping the ropes around my hand and rolling hard on the work surface rather than poking a hole into a ball of dough then widening it; I like the rustic look it gives the bagels and is also faster to execute. They underwent a 1 hour proof then into the fridge overnight.I boiled them the next day for 1 minute on each side but they took an extra minute to come to the surface so a total of 3 minutes of boiling time. They are almost the same size as the pot in which I'm boiling them.Onto a kitchen towel they went to remove excess moisture and here is how they look.They were baked in my clay pot over heated pebbles for 15 minutes, then flipped and baked for another 15 minutes. Because of their size, 30 minutes total baking time with live fire all the time. I love the pebbles, they provide even high heat to minimize burning. A single burnt spot is almost inevitable but it's a humongous leap of improvement from my previous bakes if you have seen them before. In case you wanna see, here is how they look before flipping.I cooled them for an hour before slicing and freezing. I take one before I go to my class and toast it and slather it with anything for my snack.Ready for school. I put some cheese in it this time. You can see my lunch of rice and siu mai that day too. Honestly I still felt a little hungry that day but not as hungry as I used to be, thanks to the bagel!The crust was very crispy and crumb was very chewy but soft. The aroma was very sweet and fragrant and very appetizing. Sweet and wheaty with almost no tang. Delicious on its own or with spreads.They were really big, this was the smallest of the three. Look how massive it is!
This week's bake was Trevor Wilson's Tartine Style Country Bread, along with a basic white to use up levain. Monday 3 pm refresh starter 5 g + 10 g water + 15 g flour. mix and leave on bench. room temperature 26 deg Celcius Monday 8:30 pm added 30 g water and 30 g flour. room temperature now 23 deg C. Leave overnight on bench Tuesday 8:45 am add 45 g water + 45 g flour.  Room temperature back to 23 deg C,  Not a standard build, just wanted to keep it going till after lunch Formula Tartine Style Country Bread 340 g bread flour (incl 12 g gluten flour) (63.4%) 131 g freshly milled spelt (24.4%) 65 g freshly milled rye (12.2%) 449 g Water (83.8%!!) 12 g salt (2.28%) 102 g Starter (19%) This is way over my comfort level, but bread looked awesome on Breadwerx site!! I just used the levain I had built even though it wasn't 100% hydration, more like 95% perhaps. 11:45 am Mix flours and water for Tartine style Country Bread and leave. 2:25 pm add salt and levain, dimple it in, then stretch and folds and mix by hand until all incorporated.  This was one wet dough!!  Then did 15 minutes of what Trevor calls Rubaud method of scooping (to mimic diving arm mixer).  I let it rest for 10 minutes then did another 10 minutes. This was followed by sets of stretch and folds every 30 minutes, the last one just before we went out for dinner.  Left the dough to bulk ferment.  On returning home at 7:45 pm I did another set of stretch and folds. 20 minutes later gave a few more folds before tipping onto bench.  Oh boy! I think it went a little too far.  Divided into 2 lots and  managed to preshape.  30 minutes later struggled to do final shape with any degree of tension.  Placed in banneton and retarded over night. Baked this morning at 250 deg C for 15 minutes lid on, 15 minutes lid off my DO (preheated).  Result: 2 pancakes. Disappointing, obviously I didn't build enough strength  so next time will work on that.  Crumb is nice but not what I was aiming for.   A slice from each loaf.  It will taste good for sure, but I wish it had more volume!  Next time, I will be sure to shape a little earlier. To use up the levain I had over (can't waste this stuff!!) I just mixed up a basic 1:2:3 sourdough. Formula 67 g levain 325 g flour 200 g water 6.5 g salt 12:30 pm mix flours and water 2:10 pm add levain and salt and incorporate with stretch and folds.  Left to rest then added another 25 g water and slowly incorporated it over next couple of hours as it felt pretty low hydration (not as much levain left as I anticipated) but it was still a firm dough. I did 4 sets of stretch and folds. 5:30 preshape  5:45 final shape, into banneton then the fridge overnight.  Baked at 250 reducing to 230 deg C.  DO already hot so 15 minutes lid on 15 minutes lid off. Crumb is ok but would have liked it a bit more open. I think it needed a bit longer bulk ferment and this morning when I baked, I realised I had meant to make 2 x 300 g boules, not 1 larger one.  Never mind, it will taste fine. Happy baking Leslie
This is a further experiment with the rye banana SD I posted a week or so ago. I wanted to see what would happen if I got more  and quicker rise out of it and less sticky to work with . I used my AYW and made two levains. I also roasted the bananas as I had read that if they are cooked instead of raw they seem to not inhibit the action of the SD yeasts. I doubled the formula and made 3 approx 700 g boules this time. I also used my really big granite roaster circa 1940. Wow...is all I can say. Two boules fit perfectly. No time at all in the oven to get to 500 degrees. I did two first and then remembered someone on here posted they threw in some icecubes into their roaster. I did it for number 3 and look at the ears !! Will do that from now on as well. Cast iron shall continue to reside in the basement....granite roaster is the way to go , at least for me. 500 g mixed levain= 400g of 50% unbleached KA and 50% fresh milled rye at 100% hydration with banana yeast water ( made it from my AYW by adding fresh sliced bananas and waited a couple hours for lots of bubbles to appear then fed over a couple hours 2 x to get the 400g. Started with 10 g NMNF ) 100g AYW levain fed only KA 440 g AP KA flour 90g freshly milled rye 110 g spring hard wheat flour 500g roasted bananas ( roast in peels at 300 degrees till black. let cool and squeeze out pulp and water ) 70g date syrup 70g yogurt 18g salt mix everything but salt. I place salt on top of resting dough and spray well with water.  Let rest for an hour or so till puffy.  Do 30 turns in the bowl a few times every 30 min. incorporating salt and watching for texture of dough to become pliable. Remove from bowl and begin gentle stretch and folds a few times. Add in the chopped dates and pecans. I don't weigh these I go by how it looks and feels. Place dough in oiled container and let rest in warm place till about 50 % . Yeast water moves fast so don't leave it too long. shape as desired and cover and retard in fridge. I took these out of cold about 30 min before baking to get the YW started again. As dab noted YW loves warmth. Preheat granite ware pot to 500. Place loaves inside and throw in a few ice cubes. Cover and bake 500 for 10 min reduce to 475 for 10 min. Remove cover and cont to bake 475 for 20 min -----if making larger loaves adjust final uncovered time till 205 or so degrees. Amazing bread. Crumb pics added. This bread was impossible to resist. Still a little warm but we had it with " breakfast for dinner" . Those are strawberries with my homemade Meyer Lemon curd....oh yum !!  The bread has a delicious tender crumb. Banana flavor really comes through. Not as heavy as the other loaf as there is less rye. Could have put even more dates...can't have too many dates LOL !   Will not forget the ice cubes ever again. Will cut that loaf on Sunday at our pot luck at our Buddhist center and will see if there is any difference. Definitely a keeper loaf. I will be subbing other fruit for the banana and see what I get. Stay tuned.
Fried up these donuts for a brunch and filled them with a citrus curd made using blood oranges and rose water! Recipe: Levain: 110g bread flour 35g starter 15g honey 60g water Dough: 500g bread flour 2 eggs 70g sugar 15g salt 130g milk 15g diastatic malt (optional) all of the levain 130g butter 1 tbsp vanilla extract ---- Filling: 1 cup sugar 8 egg yolks 20g corn starch 2/3 cup blood orange juice + 2 tbsp rose water pinch of salt 2 tbsp blood orange or lemon zest 10 tbsp butter ----- Mix the levain ingredients together and let proof till active/doubled. Mix in the remaining ingredients and knead for 10-15 minutes. After the dough has come together leave at room temperature for 2-4 hours, or until doubled in volume)  (*in the meantime, make the filling) refrigerate overnight. The next morning take out the dough and divide into 16 circles of 1inch thickness (or divide into squares to save time). Let rise at room temperature till doubled in volume. For me this took 3 hours. Fry in 350F oil for about two minutes per side. Place each cooked donut on rack and once all of the donuts are done, toss them with granulated sugar. Let them cool for about 30 minutes before piping in the filling. *For the filling: Place all of the ingredients in a pot and cook on medium heat, mixing constantly until it thickens enough to coat the back of the spoon. Transfer to a bowl and refrigerate overnight. - happy baking!
I usually bake on a baking stone in a convection oven with mixed results.. Over the last few months I have managed some consistency and although the bread was good I never quite achieved what I wanted. So the other day I came across an old dutch oven in the back of my Mum's kitchen cupboard and borrowed it for a trial run.... I can safely say this is easily the best loaf I have ever made, the Dutch oven changed my bread in every single way... rise, crust, texture, taste. So the dutch oven is now on a permanent loan and my baking stone has been consigned to the back of my kitchen cupboard forever! Already excited about next bake!
One of these kids is not like the others one of these kids is doing his own thing (a little sesame street jingle to introduce today's bake models). Pushing the envelope a bit today after a slight step back last week and learning from mistakes I am finding that a 12% levain build and overall 53% hydration seems to be the sweet spot for croissant spring as today we got some nice flakey and inflated croissants and, ... the addition of a chocolate version which turned out not so bad. I had been thinking about a chocolate croissant where instead of planting a few chips before rolling it would be more interesting to incorporate cocoa into the dough or butter, all in a effort to produce something with visual appeal. I read up on a recipe that used a chocolate butter and wasn't to fond of the photos I saw as this recipe seemed to produce rather ugly mutants with dark butter bleeding everywhere so, instead I decided to use butter slab as normal and then layer in some cocoa between dough layers. After the first fold things looks great and it wasn't until the second and third folds that that the incredible dryness of cocoa proved to complicate lamination - suffice to say it was rather difficult but with enough patience (and speed as we work against the clock and warming dough with laminates). As is quite obvious the chocolate species did not proof nor spring up as high but still had decent structure - I would say much more than the article I read. So, all in all, happy with the standard variety as they are a positive step in the consistency department and, with he bonus of an interesting chocolate variation - that's a bake that makes ya feel a decent sense of accomplishment :)
European Peasant Loaf I am continuing my quest, as one of many others, for getting better oven spring and open crumb. This is my adaptation of Trevor’s European Peasant Bread. Recipe: 150 g freshly milled spelt 150 g freshly milled rye 150 g Arva Mills whole wheat flour 820 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax 850 g filtered water 23 g Himalayan pink salt 30 g kefir 280 g 100% hydration levain (procedure for this is in recipe) As a side note, the second batch of 6 loaves (I make 12 total for those who don’t know and one batch makes 3 loaves), the bulk ended up much closer to a 50% rise by the time I got to it. I remembered reading that if you get closer to 50%, do not do a fold to remove the dough. Just remove it as gently as possible, with a scraper in order to not deflate it. The second batch turned out just as well as the first. Batch #2 Batch #1 I am very curious to see what the crumb looks like but the loaves are still hot. Crumb shot to come later.
First a shout out to JustJoel whose post lit a fire under me to get this post finished! A few years I visited Puglia (Apulia) in Southern Italy, where I was introduced to grano arso.  Translated as "burnt wheat," it is the flour made from the few grain kernels remaining after the farmers burned the stalks in the fields but before they were plowed under to prepare for a new planting. The poor workers would collect these grains and use them to supplement their already meager subsistence by incorporating them into pasta and bread products. I was able to find and bring home a small amount of grano arso semola which was made from durum wheat. I used it in making some very good pasta, but did not have enough for bread. I tried to reproduce the flavor by roasting some extra fancy durum flour in a smoker for several hours. It worked, kinda sorta. Fast forward to couple of weeks ago when I saw this article that rekindled my interest. The difference between now and a few years ago is that I have acquired a grain mill in the interim, so now I could roast whole berries and then mill them, which makes the process much more like the original.  I experimented with a couple of bread bakes using Italian emmer wheat (farro medio), which I had on hand (and I think is more flavorful than the hard white or red varieties of wheat berries). Preparing the burnt wheat was a fairly straightforward process. I placed the berries in a single layer on a cookie sheet into an oven heated to 375˚F for 13-18 min.  The berries darkened considerably and started to smoke after around 10 min. I called them done when they were a light chestnut color, though I believe I could have roasted them even darker for more flavor. They were milled finely in a single pass using a Mockmill. The grains lost about 11% of their starting weight after roasting, probably mostly the loss of water from within the grain. I assumed that the roasting process would destroy the glutens, so most of the flour was white and whole wheat with the grano arso contributing only to the taste and presumably not to the structure or texture.  I blended in about 13% of the total flour weight for the first bake.  The grano arso was also quite thirsty, so I kept adding water until it "felt right" and I reached almost 100% hydration. In retrospect, this was a bit too much water and although the gluten developed quite well and the crumb was very open, the loaf was a bit flatter than I had hoped. This is what the first loaves and crumb looked like.  The crumb was extremely creamy, as you would expect with such a high hydration. The crust was good but softened fairly quickly. The taste of the grano arso was immediately apparent, not unlike burned popcorn, but in a nice way. In the crumb shot there are black specks that I believe are from the grano arso.  The loaf was very tasty, but I think the grano arso was a little too much and the sweetness of the other grains was overpowered. But I do love the rich coffee color the grano arso brings to the loaves. For the next attempt I reduced the hydration a bit and also reduced the grano arso to under 8% to make the flavor a bit more in the background. This worked flavor-wise: the burnt flavor was more subtle so it paired well with more foods. I kept the salt low for these first bakes, but I think the grano arso can take a fair amount of salt, maybe up to 2.5%. I used a lower hydration because of the reduced grano arso, but I think I went a bit too far in the opposite direction.  The gluten was well developed but the crumb structure was not quite so open. I think between the two bakes I've seen the upper and lower limits of hydration, so the next bake will be somewhere in the middle. The two loaves on the left of this photo are made with grano arso. The other two are basically the same formula using einkorn flour that I made in case the first ones didn't work out. There is a huge flavor range to explore here - different grains, different roasting times, different percentages depending on what it will be served with. I look forward to the challenge. -Brad
BASIC SOURDOUGH BOULE, 70% HYDRATION, 80% TYPE 550 BIODYNAMIC FLOUR FROM SPIELBERGERMUEHLE AND 20% MACINATO INTERO DI FARRO FROM MULINO MARINO. RETARDED 18 HOURS. BAKED IN A COMBI OVEN ON A BAKING STEEL, WITH THE COMBO COOKER COVER FOR THE FIRST 15 MINUTES. AND JUST FOR FUN....I HAD ABOUT 150 GRAMS OF DOUGH LEFTOVER AFTER SCALING SO I LAMINATED IT ( (RATHER ROUGHLY) FOR A BREKFAST PASTRY WITH 60% BUTTER, DATE SUGAR, CINNAMON AND RAISINS....IT HAD 3 TURNS. I ROLLED IT INTO A LOG, CUT IT INTO ABOUT 1.5 INCH SLICES AND BAKED IN A SMALL LOAF PAN. IT DISAPPEARED BEFORE I HAD A CHANCE TO TRY BUT I HEAR IT WAS GOOD.
Another double levain dough. I joined a facebook group that uses only yeast waters for baking. Wow....there is SO much info and amazing pictures of breads etc. Anyway I got my feet wet , so to speak with date water. I took a small amount of my AYW and inoculated it with 6 dried dates. Whoa...stand back !  It was full of bubbles in just a couple hours using the lights in my oven to warm it. I added a piece of orange peel, as I do with my apple yeast water, as I think it keeps it from getting too much  alcohol formation. 733g unbleached KA 266g Spring WW 266g Durum flour 66g yogurt 66g maple syrup 400g ripe rye levain at 100% hydration 100g date YW 600g filtered water 26g kosher salt I got many of these figures for this formula from a post Danni had some time back. I double it and changed some things but I have her to thank for the yogurt. It finds its way into all my breads now. I have Ian to thank for the buns :) he has great ones . Bread1965 gave me the idea I used for mixing this dough although I changed up one big part. I mixed everything but the salt till a shaggy moist dough. I then covered and set the dough on the radiator to warm. He lets his set for 5 hrs. I think mine was closer to 3 1/2. It was amazingly puffy . Note I did NOTHING but mix to a shaggy stage with a rubber spatula.....no turns or twists or pinches etc. Nothing. I departed from his method at this point. I added the moistened salt by folding in the bowl. I then left it 30min and did a s&f on the board. Dough was SO extensible and puffy  . I waited 30 min and did another s&f. One more at 30 min and that was all. I had gorgeous gluten development. Since I knew I was making buns I then placed it in a bucket and retarded overnight in the fridge at 34 degrees. Look at that growth overnight !! It was barely at 2L when it went into the fridge . I removed gently from the bucket and used scissors to cut 3.5 oz pieces. Shaped gently and let rise 1 hr Brushed with egg yolk/half and half mix and sprinkled sesame seeds. Preheated oven to 500. Baked buns for 3 min at 500 and lowered to 475 for 12 min. Rotated pans top to bottom shelves and baked 5 more minutes at 450. Perfect. crumb shot added....tender and wonderfully flavorful...just a hint of the date sweetness. Amazingly fragrant crumb
Well, not sure where my head was yesterday, it was perhaps a comedy of errors but I didn't think that as I put the dough in the fridge to proof overnight.  Start at the beginning. Three different bakes, 1 small loaf each. Monday 13:30 refresh 60% ish starter 10 g = 20 water + 30 flour 21:30 pm mix three levains and leave overnight on bench.  it was cool overnight - only 18 deg C when I got up next morning/ Tuesday 7 am - put levains in a cooler part of the pantry as I would not need till after lunch. 11:45 am Country Champlain.  Mix together Bread flour 169 g + 6 g gluten Fresh milled spelt 67 g Fresh milled rye 34 g Water 215 g 13:45 pm Add 6 g salt and 52 g 100% hydration levain. Stretch and fold until incorporated then approx 10 minutes mixing the Rubaud style Rest 10 minutes then repeat for another 5 minutes (using left arm this time!) It is now 14:15 pm and left dough to rest. 14:45 pm Stretch and folds * 20 15:15 pm Stretch and folds * 15 15:55 pm Stretch and fold * 9 then 2 more stretch and folds * 5. 19:00 preshaped dough - it was sticky but  using bench knife managed it, just! The dough was spreading like crazy and not holding its shape so after 10 minutes, I oiled the bench knife and managed to shape this very poofy dough into a boule - no way could I have done a batard!. Retard overnight Baked this morning 250 deg C for 15 minutes lid on, 230 deg C for 15 lid off. Here it is before scoring and baking. Oh dear, another pancake!  But it is light!  This ended up being about 80% hydration, I forgot to account for the water in the 100% levain so it was obviously much wetter/softer than planned.  This is the lead photo So on to loaf no 2.  Yeast water & sourdough loaf Monday night I had mixed a poolish (hope that is correct terminology) of 65 g yeast water and 65 g flour. Tuesday 12:15 pm mixed flours together for autolyse and when I wanted to add water, realised I had added yeast water to it so this would change the plan.  So I threw it out and measured water again, added to the flour and of course it was not sufficient. :( Back to drawing board.  Re calculated recipe based on what I had and so I added extra flour and water at 12:45 pm and could now get a reasonable dough for autolyse Bread flour + gluten 396 g Water 194 g 13:35 pm Add levain 35 g (I had forgotten to mix this and luckily had kept left over from evening before so it was 60% hydration) Yeast water 57 g Salt 8 g Mixed until incorporated.  then left to rest. At 14:00 decided it didn't look mixed enough so I did about 1 minute or so of Rubaud method. 14:30 Stretch & fold * 20 15:00 Stretch & fold * 15 15:30 Stretch and fold * 10 and at 15:55 stretch and fold * 8.  The final stretch and folds *5 were at 17:00 pm 18:00 pm preshaped.  Dough very poofy 18:20 pm Very soft, hard to shape.  Did just manage to get a not very tight batard.  Into fridge to proof overnight. This morning when others were baking I popped it into the freezer to firm it up.  Made it hard to get out of the banneton.  Baked 250 deg C lid on for 15 minutes, lid off at 230 deg C for 15 minutes. This dough ended up being about 80% hydration - I miscalculated when recalculating the formula. No wonder it was hard to shape!! A bit flat, but it too is light.  Better than I thought it would be. Finally bake no. 3, a simple 1:2:3 loaf 12:30 pm yesterday Mix flours and water for autolyse bread flour 190 g incl extra gluten Spelt flour freshly milled 67 g Rye flour freshly milled 33 g Water 250 g 14:25 pm add 97 g 100% hydration levain and 6.6 g salt. Stretch and folds to incorporate. 14:25 pm stretch and fold * 20 15:00 pm Stretch and fold * 17 15:30 Stretch and fold * 10 15:55 pm Stretch and fold * 7 leave then 5 stretch and folds at 17:00 pm and 18:00 pm 18:30 pm preshape. - very sticky, hard to shape, 18:45 pm  final shape.  Could not hold shape of batard so made a boule. Retard overnight. Baked this morning at 250 deg C for 15 mins lid on, 15 minutes lid off at 230 deg.  When I removed lid, I removed parchment and this was a bit early so the scores closed up again  and it became a bit of a funny shape because I interfered with the loaf. :( Well after all that, I was a bit down - really disappointed with my bake.  Apart from the YW mix up the mixing and stretch and folds had gone well.  It went pear shaped at shaping.  We couldn't resist by lunchtime so we cut the loaves .  Crumb shots Top 2 slices - Country Champlain bottom 2 slices 1:2:3 loaf Ok very pleasantly surprised by Country Champlain. Nice open crumb.  If it had held its shape, I would have been happier.  1:2:3 - crumb is good, but it feels a lot heavier and it is obviously not as open. Yeast water / sourdough loaf Now I am pretty happy with this crumb, would have been better if it hadn't spread so much but it was pretty high hydration for me.  I couldn't resist this last shot At first I couldn't figure it out, why so all were so hard to shape.  I rechecked calculations today and some of the reason is the high hydration.  Too high for NZ flours.  Lesson learned! Also going to repeat the 1:2:3 loaf in a week, then 2 weeks using the same batch of milled flour and see if that makes a difference. i.e fresh vs aged flour Tomorrow I am going to try Country Champlain again - just a small loaf  - two ways. 1. As I did this bake but with much lower hydration.  I have double checked my figures so will try at 74% hydration 2. I have milled the spelt and rye and sifted it.  I will build the levain tonight using the bran and then in the morning some of the sifted flour for the levain and see if this helps too.  This will also be at 74% hydration. This is such a challenge, so many variables but hopefully I can figure it out.
whew....I think that says it all !  Date yeast water has been stored in fridge. Still going strong and I had added water to the used dates to see how it would hold up. So far so good. Levain loves Kamut . It filled the jar in a matter of a couple hours so I stored in fridge. Using up many flours from Breadtopia in an effort to move forward with grinding my own grains. These three loaves are the proportions that I used for the buns except I used more grains in the mix to = 532g. I used my Middle Eastern date syrup instead of maple syrup. Final dough is Hard white Spring WW, fresh milled rye, Turkey Hard Red Winter wheat. Process. I am still experimenting with almost no hands on. Works really well. I mixed to shaggy stage only making sure ALL was wet. Used a large silicone spatula. NO SALT. Everything else in the bowl. Let it rest on radiator for 4 hrs. Sprinkled on Salt and wet it with spray bottle. Did 30 turns in the bowl with spatula. Covered and left 30 min. one set s & f. left 30 min and did one more set. Then a wrinkle ....I forgot the dough !! yikes !  Didn't set the clock...went about my business for a couple hours....oh wow !! dough loved every minute on its own...appears I have created a very independent bread formula !  Turned it out and cut three chunks for boules. New shaping technique employed that last few loaves with great results....look at those ears !  All I do is lightly dust both sides of dough. Then I pull four corners to the center and pinch them together as much as possible. Flip it over with this side down so will be free-form on top when turned out. No pre-shape ,no dough scraper, no gluten sheath tightening....nothing. Takes a few seconds. Doesn't degas the dough at all. Baking. Utilizing my granite ware roasters. 500 degree preheat in oven...takes about 15 min with my electric oven. have loaves on parchment , lower in to hot roaster put in one ice cube. Cover bake at 500 for 10 min lower to 475 10 min. Remove cover...go WOW !  finish for 20 min at 475. Internal temp 211. Crumb shot when thoroughly cooled date YW kamut levain date syrup/levain/yogurt flour mix dough without salt ....rising nicely and developing structure with salt sprayed with water after 2nd  set of s&f ! after first set of s&f filled the banneton over night in the fridge nice cracks soon to be ears ! yep....looking good love my OVE gloves and my roasters gorgeous even fine crumb with very crisp crust. flavor is remarkable and only a tiny hint of sour very tender chew As I said the formula is the same as the buns I posted. 100g of active date YW added to 600g water  and 400g active kamut levain ( it was a rye levain in the buns) My feeling is that the levain works slower and the YW works faster but the YW needs warmth and the levain not as much . Seems to complement each other throughout the retarding of the dough as well as the bake. Will post pics of crumb when I get them.
Decided to make a cake that uses sourdough as the only leavening agent so I developed this recipe inspired by pineapple upside down cake and blood orange and black sesame seeds in my pantry. This isn't a very sweet cake, you can adjust the sweetness based on preference by adding more or less of the orange blossom syrup. Dough: 550g KA ap flour 50g coconut sugar 7g diastatic malt 65g milk 4 eggs 4oz butter softened 100g active starter ------ Syrup: 1 cup sugar 1 cup water 3 tbsp lemon juice 1 tsp orange blossom water ------ Candied Orange Layer: 1 blood orange very thinly sliced 1/4 cup sugar ------- Mix all the dough ingredients minus the butter together in a bowl. I was able to just mix it all together with a wooden spoon and didn't need to use my mixer, but using a mixer would be easier here. Once all the ingredients are mixed, add in the softened butter and mix until the dough is smooth and resembles thick cake batter or very wet dough. Let the dough sit at room temperature for 2 hours then place in the fridge overnight. The next morning take the dough out of the fridge and let it come to room temperature. While this happens, prepare your pan. I used a 9inch aluminum pot. I buttered the bottom and placed a 9inch circle of parchment paper over the butter, then spread a then layer of butter over the parchment paper. Then I sprinkled half of the 1/4 cup of sugar over the parchment, placed down the orange slices, and sprinkled the remaining sugar over them. I didn't grease the sides of the pot because I wanted to dough/batter to be able to travel up/stick to the sides as it rose. After the dough comes to room temperature, pour it over the orange sugar layer and let proof until almost doubled in volume. This took about 3 hours in my kitchen. In the meantime, boil the syrup ingredients together for about 5 minutes and set aside to cool. When the cake is proofed, bake at 400F for 50 minutes or until a toothpick placed in the center comes out clean or a thermometer placed in the center reads 210F.  Take it out of the oven and let it rest for ten minutes then take a fork and prick the surface. Brush on some of the simple syrup and let that soak for about twenty minutes, then flip the cake out of the pot, peel the parchment off to reveal the now candied orange layer. Let cool and enjoy. Happy Baking!
See it is more matt.  I took the picture out to protect the innocent
All the plants with the exception of the cactus are blooming right now in the front yard.   This was the last one to bloom  today
Sourdough: sweet or sour, I like it but each have its own place where it shines and complements whatever it was paired with. A pairing that is greater than the sum of its parts; the bread and its pair become exponentially more delicious that if one was to eat each one separately and alone. I was focused for a long time in baking mild sourdoughs because my parents do not like sour breads and I haven't met anyone with a greater or at least the same "Sour Threshold" as mine. My sourest loaf for them is still mild for me and for my favorite combination a super sour bread is the order for the best experience. Recently, I was inspired by Lechem with a post on A lesson in bringing out the tang but I took it to the extreme with my wild style. There are a lot of techniques for getting a more sour bread like manipulating time and temperature and altering the flour and liquid makeup of the bread including Uncle Dab's bran levain and bran water as liquid in the levain originally done and explored by Doc.Dough but finding whole grains in my area is still a hit and miss for me so all of the tang of this bread was coaxed from all white flour. I decided to preferment a greater quantity of flour as said by Hamelman and ferment it cold and slow. I also took a page from Abel's book; that is the super levain which is super enlightening since that prefermented flour considered an insane amount by conventional knowledge appears to have no ill effects on the dough. I bake with a lot of uncommon ingredients especially for those who grew up in the bread baking world but sometimes my purist side as a baker comes through occasionally wanting to make bread using only flour, water, yeast and salt. I don't want this bread to be one dimensional sour but have a complex taste with the tang taking center stage. I also want the tang profile to be 2/5 acetic acid and 3/5 lactic acid or a 40/60 acetic-lactic acid ratio. Here's what I did based on different sources and my own experiences.My starter has been retarded for 3 months already but no matter how long it stays there; once I feed it, it loses its tang. My tangiest loaf used a levain built in 2 stages 12 hours each; tangy for sure but I want a bit more so from that I modified the process a bit. 66% of the flour was prefermented in 3 builds with each build almost doubling the amount of flour and the final build retarded in the fridge for 3 full days, I mean 72 hours. In my case, instead of doing a single "big build" with the same amount of prefermented flour that will make my starter lose more of its potential tang, I think the secret is to let the final acid build-up get to the maximum in each build for getting that sour flavor to the maximum too.Here is the levain after 3 days in the fridge. I used bread flour from the very beginning since it is better for long and in this case very long fermentation. It was very firm before fermentation but its now sticky with a wonderful whole structure. The smell was very sour enough to trigger a sensation at the back of my mouth. I used it directly from the fridge since things come to room temperature here quite fast. Given the sticky nature of the huge amount of prefermented flour and some gluten degrading, I used very little water for the final dough just enough to let it come together as a dough with the additional bread flour. I made a 30 minute autolyse at room temperature before adding the salt. I decided to go the dabrownman and alfanso route and gave the dough 300 slap and folds (with one hand since the dough is small enough) then 3 sets of stretch and folds 20 minutes apart. In fear of overfermentation, I refrigerated the dough after the second stretch and fold (after 40 minutes at room temp.) the complete the final one when dough is cold.I gave it a preshape at night then into the fridge again until the following morning for the final shaping and proofing.I shaped it directly from the fridge and to keep it from spreading because I was afraid of the vigorous microbial and enzymatic activities, I proofed it in a container taller than it is wide. Because of being overly careful about the fermentation time I made a huge mistake!When I pressed it after 2 hours at room temp. I felt it was very soft and giving in without much resistance. I immediately fired up the clay pot and when it was ready and I turned the dough onto a banana leaf, boy it was way underproofed! It quickly springs back when pressed, not wanting to waste the fire, I slashed the dough and proceeded to bake it anyway.The smell was very sour and vinegary before baking. Never have I encountered such thing with all of my sourdoughs. I baked it for a long time so long that I cannot remember. I also used embers for the most part because the pebbles packs a lot of heat.Crust evenly browned with a few very boldly baked spots and full of blisters.Crumb definitely underproofed to me but not underfermented. :)My conlusions:1. This bread can take slightly more water for an even softer crumb and better handling qualities.2.  I can afford a little more fermentation time both during bulk and the final proof with no ill effects. I was surprised how strong the dough felt given the activities in the dough.3. I can still up the prefermented flour.In case you want to try this method. Here is a timeline of what I did:66% of the flour was prefermented. Divide this amount into 12. (I am not very good in math so I will not write in simplest form to avoid confusion). You can do this at any hydration (this is closer to 62-65%) you wish and make your own adjustments especially with the timings.23:45 W- Refreshment Build- Inoculate 1/12 of the flour with a teaspoon of stock starter. Knead with enough water to achieve a firm consistency.11:45 Th- Intermediate Build- All of the refreshment build plus 3/12 of the flour and enough water to yield a firm dough.23:45 Th- Souring Build- All of the intermediate build plus the remaining (8/12) flour and enough water to make a firm dough.08:00 F- Retard the final build for 72 hours.08:00 M- Add the remaining (34% of total) flour and remaining water. Autolyse for 30 minutes.08:30 M-  Add the salt (perhaps it can take as high as 2.5%) and mix it in. Give 300 slap and folds.09:00 M- Stretch and fold at 20 minute intervals.09:40 M- Refrigerate final dough.10:00 M- Give final stretch and fold and refrigerate again.20:00 M- Preshape and refrigerate again.10:00 T- Final shaping and proof for 2 hours in a cloth lined container dusted with cornstarch.12:00 T- Turn onto a banana leaf, bake then cool completely before slicing.Crust was crunchy but became a bit chewy after cooling. Crumb was soft like it was made with AP even though made with BF and was underfproofed. Very fragrant of banana leaves with a deeply caramelized aroma and notes of vinegar. Taste was complex, wheaty but with no perceived sweetness. The tang really came through; very very tangy with the desired tang profile of 40/60 acetic-lactic taste. It brushes the lower limits of mouth puckering when eaten alone. This is a bread that is not for everyone but only for sour bread lovers but this bread was also not meant to be eaten alone; it was made to highlight the taste of specific food items: peanut butter for me. I was so glad with how this one turned out. Had this bread been proofed right, the results would be even more outstanding. It's nice to know that I can manipulate the flavors of sourdough. I'm curious on how this one would taste with whole grains in it and what modifiers shall I add to the name of this bread because it will be even tangier.My parents who do not like sour breads (in fact, they did not like this when they first tasted this but..) agreed with the peanut butter magic! The sourness of the bread complements the sweetness and slight saltiness of the peanut butter (Our first time also to try crunchy peanut butter. Where was this gem for many years?! Even better than the smooth one.) extremely well elevating the taste of each other to whole new levels for a sublime experience.Toasted with a thick schmear of peanut butter.
A question to those of you out there doing this - dabrownman, Danni and any others.  How exactly do you do this? Do you mill the flour required for the bake, sift out the bran then use bran instead of flour for 1st build, sieved flour for remainder or do you just mill some random amount of flour, sieve the bran out then take from these two fractions whatever you need you need for the levain part of the bake? My last bake was so small and I tried adding bran to the levain.  I only made a small loaf so there was not much to play with.  I would like to try again but for a bigger loaf so want to understand process better first. Leslie
Above: chocolate babka filling and cinnamon swirl At the start of this month, Abel posted his version of a Pain Viennois, a bread I'd not ever heard of before, but it is a pretty darn good looking loaf.  At least the way he does it!  Much more appealing than the "traditional" version which looks more like a baguette in shape and adorned with as many as 20 or so scores diagonally down its length. So it bubbled up to the top of my to-do list.  I've now gone two iterations with this bread and have my report to turn in to teacher.  Some steps forward, but falling quite short of where Abel is.  For the first time through, I probably made too many cuts in the dough surface, corrected on the second try. One major difference is the coloration and char on the 2nd bake vs. the brighter luster of the 1st.  Baked at the same temperature for the same amount of time, the only difference is that I used steam for the 1st bake.  I had this notion that enriched breads were less "needy" when it came to steam, but apparently that is not the case. And then there is the significant difference between Abel's bread opening up from oven spring vs. mine.  So here are some of the gory details. There was hardly any oven spring and the loaf came out being fairly square.  So, where am I missing the mark?  I want to keep this bread in rotation, but there are some significant gaps between where the bread is now and where it should be.  Looking for some guidance here. ***With feedback and help from a few of the TFL farmhands, I'll be applying some changes the next go-round. This dough is quite stiff when being mixed, and my Kitchen Aid mixer's dough hook treats the dough as not much more than a horse-tail treats a fly.  It just spends its time swatting away the dough. At the outset of the proof. Out of the oven and not looking too swift. Comparison to the crust from the 1st bake, but again, no oven spring. As this is a "plain sandwich" bread,  beyond a mild "pleasant" taste, there really isn't much to it.  Makes a fine toast, and I'm sure that it would also make for some dandy French Toast too.   So for bake #2, I added the chocolate filling that I use for a babka on one and a cinnamon swirl (cinnamon and sugar mixed together).  Just for fun.  And really to try and bump up the flavor of this bread. Abel describes his learning this bread from a fellow baker at Granier Bakery.  Located in Sunny Isles Beach,  just north of Miami Beach.  Sunny Isles has so many towering residential skyscrapers lining the beach side of the road that it has somewhere along the lines been dubbed "Shady Isles Beach".  We took a drive down there the other day...
I wanted to compare the effect of using bran in the levain vs whole flour.  So on Wednesday morning I weighed out a little more spelt and rye berries than I needed (allowing for slight loss during milling) for each levain build then milled them.  I did this a little differently than usual. I set the Mockmill on 4-5 and milled the first batch.  I sifted this through my kitchen sieve, kept this separate then remilled the remainder on the fine setting 1-2 and sieved this again, adding this bran to the previous bit.   The flour felt a little smoother. I repeated this for the second batch but only gave this the first sieving - there was actually very little left in the sieve. 10 am refreshed starter 5 gm starter + 5 gm water + 5 gm flour - standard refresh ex refrigerator 2 pm added 30 g water + 30 flour - again as usual.  Room temperature was 22 deg C 10 pm made the first build of the levain which was then left on the bench overnight. Bread #1 - 10 gm refreshed starter + 10 gm water + 7 gm bran (all I had) + 3 gm double sifted flour Bread # 2 - 10 gm refreshed starter + 10 gm water + 10 gm bread flour Thursday 2nd levain builds at 7 am room temperature 19  deg C - a bit cool, where has my sunshine gone?!! Bread #1 15 gm from evening build + 15 gm water + 15 gm double sieved flour Bread # 2 15 gm from evening build + 15 g water + 15 gm bread flour This was left on bench to hopefully mature.  My formula for both loaves as follows Freshly milled spelt 38 gm Freshly milled rye 19 gm This was milled together so  bread #1 double sieved, bread #2 minimal sieving Bread flour 98 gm + 4 gm gluten flour Water 114 gm Salt 3.12 gm levain 24 gm 12:20 pm mixed the ingredients for bread #1 to shaggy dough then left to autolyse 12:30 pm mixed the ingredients for bread #2 to shaggy dough then left to autolyse 13:45 pm Add salt and bran levain for #1, dimple in, 30 stretch and folds followed by 5 minutes Rubaud method. 14:05 pm Bread #1 5 minutes mixing Rubaud method but using left hand - its hard work! 14:45 pm Bread #1 stretch & folds * 20 15:15 pm Stretch & folds * 10 15:45 pm stretch and folds * 8 Repeated all steps exactly for bread #2 (standard levain), just 10 minutes later, so here is #2 after Rubaud mixing 16:45 both breads given stretch & folds * 7 and repeated at 17:30 pm and 18:30 pm. 20:00 pm Bread # 1 preshaped 20:30 pm Bread #1 final shaping then placed on floured cloth in small bowl in refrigerator overnight. The dough was not wildly poofy but seemed to get more so as it progressed and you can see small air bubbles here.  I don't think I did a very good job of shaping.  The dough was pretty soft but still sticky and I tried hard not to degass.  I oiled the bench and hands for preshaping but chickened out and floured the bench for final shaping. Bread #2 preshaped - I felt this was a bit softer so only left it 20 minutes before final shaping and refrigerating overnight. It went a little better than #1 did-- I didn't oil the bench this time though, just flour. Friday 7 am Removed both loaves from fridge, unmoulded onto parchment, slashed loaves (1 slash #1, 2 slashes #2) baked both at same time in different DOs 15 minutes lid on at 250 deg C and 15 mins lid off at 230 deg C Lunchtime we couldn't resist. Crumb #1 bran levain We've had visitors so didn't cut bread #2 until today. Crumb shot standard build levain I think the bran levain has actually delivered a better crumb although I am not sure if there was a great deal of difference in height i.e volume after the bake.  I still need to get more tension/strength in final shaping.  The 1 slash vs 2 may have had an impact too. I had hoped for less spread and more height, so I will try again .. just one loaf but a bit bigger this time.  and I will try to make a batard fingers crossed.  There was definitely some improvement this time. Leslie
This is a repeat of the Spiced Raisin Sourdough that I did a few weeks ago with a few changes, of course. ;-) I switched out half of the golden raisins for cranberries and I changed up the method quite a bit. It was a pain in the neck and made for a very long day (I started at 7:30 am and finished at 8 pm) but I think the results are worth it! Recipe: 112 g red fife wheat berries 1000 g unbleached flour (split into 880 g and 120 g portions) 50 g freshly ground flax 179 g cranberries 179 g golden raisins 670 g water (split into 620 g + 50 g portions) plus another 10-15 g or so. 35 g kefir 2 tsp cinnamon 3 tsp mixed spice (4 tsp cinnamon, .5 tsp ginger, .5 tsp cloves, 1 tsp nutmeg, 1 tsp coriander) 22 g salt 465 g levain (building this is included in the instructions below)
This weekend’s bread was mostly spelt with a rye starter and some of last week’s leftover bread (altus). 400 gr whole spelt (fresh ground) 270 gr water 6 gr salt 80 gr refreshed rye starter ( 100% hydration) 100 gr altus* -autolyse spelt and water about 2hrs -mix in starter, rest a bit, mix in salt and altus -bulk ferment with occasional folds about 5 hrs -preshape,shape proof in fridge overnight -bake at 475 F covered for 20 min, 425 F uncovered for 20 more mins *the altus was last week’s ww bread, crust removed, soaked in water and then squeezed out.
Here's another attempt at crumb embellishment in croissants after an interesting cocoa experiment last week. Note the lower right croissant. The idea here is to have a bit of fun with the beautiful 'honeycomb' crumb that croissants produce (if done well). I wanted to see if a contrasting color could be incorporated into the lamination. The first attempt involved simply coating the dough in cocoa power and then performing the folds. That turned out to just complicate things as cocoa is so dry that nothing sticks. This time (after a suggestion by Leslie) I mixed up a separate dough with cocoa mixed in then added 3 layers to the usual 13 dough layer sheet. This improved the contrast and overall spring but seems to have caused the layers to bond during baking. All on all another fun little project (not sure what do try next though)
Baked outdoors on my Kamado ceramic oven at 500°F, cold out of the fridge. I used a large stainless steel mixing bowl to trap the steam for the first half of the baking process. Then I removed the bowl and turned the temperature down to 450°F.
I noticed the only videos online showing recipes for sourdough were around 5-10 minutes. So I tried to do it in 3, let me know what you think, and feel free to share. Thanks Patrick
This is the first bake since returning from my business trip to Germany.  I had a nice trip, but unfortunately as usual I brought back the "Black Death" with me and it took me a good week to start feeling normal again, not to mention adjust to the East Coast time zone. My wife has been dying to try making yogurt in the Instant Pot so after she finally made enough yogurt to feed a small army I decided to make use of some of it in a bread. This bake has almost 70% fresh milled and sifted flour.  I added some rye bran sifted out previously in the levain which really makes my starter go bonkers. I left the shaped dough go longer than needed and it was slightly over-proofed.  I really expected the crumb to be much more open on this one as the dough was nice and fermented before shaping but alas it was not to be. The yogurt made for a super soft crumb and added a little extra tang to the flavor profile.  All in all a tasty bread, but due to the over-proofing, not one of my prettiest bakes.  The scoring did not open up like it should have and it may have had something to do with the less open crumb as well.  Did make great bread for a nice chicken salad sandwich I made last night for dinner. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours , yogurt and water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 1 hour.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), and olive oil and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 550 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
This week I have had another try at baking Trevor Wilson's Country Champlain bread (a Tartine style loaf).  As well as this I was making the 1:2:3 loaf with flour milled a week ago (ie aged 1 week as opposed to fresh) and the night before decided to make Champlain sourdough to see the difference between these two breads. I won't go into detail of method as this was the same as last week, ( http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/55259/country-champlain-comparison ) the only difference being a slight drop of 1% in overall hydration and an unintentional smaller amount of levain in the Country Champlain and a corresponding increase in the Champlain.     I used the bran in the early stage of the build this time. The results: Country Champlain :  This dough has 24% spelt & 12 % rye Part way through S & F After some tension pulls (saw this on Trevor's instagram) Then preshaped straight afterwards The dough was left 30 minutes before shaping and it was really slack - better than last week, but still hard to get it  to hold some tension & shape. Retarded overnight in Fridge.  Bulk ferment was 5 hours. Champlain: this dough has 8% spelt and 4% rye After 1st set of stretch and folds After tension pulls - you could really feel the dough firm up. Preshape immediately after tension pulls I was quite happy with this as it went into the banneton and into fridge overnight 1:2:3 repeat using flour I had milled a week ago to see if aging a bit made a difference. This dough is 20% spelt and 10% rye After 1st Stretch & folds After tension pulls Preshaping - sticky and hard to shape into a boule Retarded overnight. This morning preheat oven and DOs.  Here are the 2 batards before unmoulding and scoring Oh dear, a slow careful drop out of the bannetons, they had stuck slightly and this rarely happens for me. Similarly, Here is the 1:2:3 loaf All baked 15 minutes lid on at 250 deg C, 15 minutes lid off at 230 deg C Final result The country champlain pancaked again, Champlain SD was not too bad, it spread a bit.  The 123 a big pancake.  When I went to put it in the smaller reheated DO to bake, I realised it had spread too much so had to grab the now cooling bigger DO instead.  Darn!! Here are crumb shots Country Champlain 1:2:3 Champlain SD - this I am reasonably happy with, not as open as my first try in November though. So, whereto from here - I really like and prefer the flavour of the Country Champlain but I need some help on what to try next. Is it the breadflour - should I try a different one? Add more gluten? More tension pulls? Less autolyse? Shorter bulk ferment? Help please Disheartened Leslie
Recently we went on a ski holiday, which was great fun, but I managed to slip over on an icy pavement when walking back to the chalet in ski boots. (No falls on the piste!) Landed on my right side, and my elbow hasn’t quite settled down yet. It didn’t interfere with skiing, but now that I’m home it is a good excuse reason to get out of the hoovering! Before the holiday I’d built my 50% hydration starter up as it was going to be sitting in the fridge for 3-4 weeks. So, on return I had plenty of starter to be going on with. As well as bread I made a batch of sourdough muffins and a double batch of parmesan and herb sourdough crackers. I usually use the Bertinet method of handling/developing my dough as I really enjoy it, but usually then do one or two extra stretch and folds, as I find that and a cold overnight proof in the fridge work well for me. It was my first use of Shipton Mill cut malted rye grain, and I was pleased with the result. 400g starter/400 white bread flour,75g rye flour,325g wholemeal flour/650g water. 30g cut malted rye grain soaked in 50ml boiling water and 120g mixed seeds added with 3rd (final) stretch and fold. The dough was soft, but handled well and I loved the flavour. But, although fine at the time, my elbow really ached the next day! Time to bake again, and its not completely better, so I decided to combine my Bertinet starter and formula with a Dan Lepard type method, and to try and go with the feel of the dough to decide on how many stretch and folds to do. 250g starter/200g white bread flour, 300g Shipton Mill 3 malts and sunflower brown bread/650g water. It took a long time to get any structure, so I did an extra round of minimal kneading and 5 sets of stretch and folds. Still a bit sticky after pre-shaping, so I added seeds to one banneton as well as using brown rice flour/bread flour mix in both. I wanted to make sure at least one loaf released well! 3.5 hours rising at room temperature before going in fridge overnight. No problem with release of either loaf - thanks to TFLers for the tip about using a rice flour mix. That’s the softest/wettest dough I’ve used it with. Whilst lining the banneton with oats or seeds works well it isn't always wanted. Good oven spring, slashing could be better. Closer crumb than usual, but I’m not particularly bothered by that as it has a very nice flavour.
After recent bakes I have been a bit disheartened. Earlier this week I got the Red Star Yeast newsletter and they featured “Unbelievable Sweet Orange rolls” - a variation on cinamon rolls.  I followed the recipe exactly (I made a slightly bigger dough and had to bake some rolls seperately) and whilst mine wasn’t as pretty as theirs, it went down a treat with friends tonight. it feels good to have a sucess and the taste was really nice - a combination of orange and cinamon.  yum! Happy baker tonight Leslie
Marquis Wheat Sourdough Fresh milled high extraction organic Marquis wheat; young levain; 85% hydration; cold proofed overnight Bacon Cheddar Caramelized Onion Sourdough Fresh milled rye, emmer and hard red wheat; young levain; caramelized onions, white cheddar, havarti, parmesan, crisped maple smoked bacon and raw sesame seed coating; 78% hydration; cold proofed overnight Toasted Ground Seed Porridge Sourdough Fresh milled emmer, rye, hard red wheat; young levain; toasted ground seed porridge (millet, sunflower, pumpkin, flax, sesame); 78% hydration; cold proofed overnight Oat Spelt Porridge Sourdough Fresh milled spelt, rye, hard red wheat with rolled oat/flaked spelt porridge; young levain; 80% hydration; coated with oat/spelt flakes and raw sesame seeds; cold proofed overnight Sprouted Flax and Emmer Sourdough Fresh milled emmer, rye and hard red wheat; sprouted emmer, sprouted flax; young levain; 85% hydration; cold proofed overnight Sunflower Flax Sourdough (based on Chad Robertson's Tartine 3 bread) Fresh milled rye, spelt, hard red wheat; toasted sunflower seeds, soaked flax seeds, sesame seeds; young levain; 85% hydration; cold proofed overnight
I felt it was time to revisit some of the recipes that I have made in the past and Ru’s Polenta Sourdough was one that I really liked and wanted to play around with a bit. So this is my second version of her recipe. Recipe: 330 g of Selkirk wheat berries (this is a 1950s hard red spring wheat variety) 110 g of cornmeal 300 g of boiling water 770 g of unbleached flour 50 g ground flax 100 g raw sunflower seeds, toasted in a dry frying pan 100 g raw pumpkin seeds, toasted in a dry frying pan 575 g water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 35 g kefir 360 g levain (100% hydration)(Instructions included below) The oven spring wasn’t what I would wish for. I am guessing that it was slightly over proofed. The photo is deceiving. The loaf doesn't look like that in real life. Next time, I think I would reduce the rest time to 15 minutes and then skip the room temperature proof and put directly into the fridge. I also retarded it for longer than usual (about 13-14 hours) and the amount of prefermented flour was more than usual as well. So live and learn. I know it will taste good. Crumb shot to come later. This is a more accurate photo of the oven spring.
Hi, I have been baking the Champlain like mad and had so much starter that I thought I try a different loaf with different bread. This recipe is from Vanessa Kimbell in UK: http://www.sourdough.co.uk/a-basic-sourdough-recipe/ I followed a recipe in her 'Food for thought' book which is essentially like the one in the link... However, note the following differences: 1. She suggests in the book 30 min MIX  of ALL ingredients (salt and starter included) - I used a bit more water at 325g water @ 28C, 100g leaven, 400g white , 100g whole, 10g salt 2. I used after this the Rubauld method to create gluten...rather than just S & F and not too difficult as dough was not too stiff to do this.. 3. 2 X 30 min S & F 4. 1 hour rest after last S & F and then tension folds to create structure and tried to let dough proof under tension created 5. I think roughly after 45 min pre-shape - dough was bubbly but not proofy yet as this can be a problem for me... 6. 1 hour bench rest- and pre-shape was quite tight and the shape relaxed to a nice pancake shape for final shape Straight into banneton after final shaping and then fridge, I tried this time floured towel in banneton and covered the dough with the towel in fridge. Still not the open crumb I yearn for and a lower hydration loaf but family and I eat happily the bread and I learnt lots rather than going for much wetter doughs which are not (YET ) in my league..... Kat
the loaf detail upper rim crackling crust crumb detail crumb This bread has different 'fathers'! The first 'father', a friend of mine, made Pâte fermentée with rye, no success, dead end! So he did not give up and made a mixed one fifty-fifty, success, that worked! He told me and so I made my PF with the amounts of wheat and rye as used in our regional peasant-breads: I feed once a week or so and one day before use. After feeding 1 h rest on the bench at roomtemp and then he lives all the time as compagnion with my sourdough in the fridge. He now is at least 1 y old! The next 'father' is Richard Bertinet. In his book 'DOUGH' he has a recipe for 'pain de campagne' with a 'rye dough' as 'starter'. It is a french rye-bread with 20 % rye-flour, and this 'rye dough' is nothing but a PF! The other 'father' is Gontran Cherrier. In his book 'GONTRAN FAIT SON PAIN' he has two recipes from the Normandy, each with a high amount of PF! The last 'father' am I. I mixed these recipes, tested and corrected and got finaly this bread! My Formula: mix, cover, and let sit 1 h on the bench for an integrated autolyse at roomtemp, then add knead as used. bulk-f : 1.5 h s&f : every 30 mn shape : boule, the seam well dusted with rye-flour! final-f : 1 1/4 h at roomtemp or in the fridge at 4-6C/39-43F for 5-10 h  (I had 6.5 h this time) placed with seam-side down in a linned banneton, well dusted with rice-flour to the linnen side and rye-flour to the loaf-side. For isolation in a sealed plastic-bag. baking : preheating the oven with pressureless steam until the oven-temp ist near 98C/210F, then load into the oven seam side up After the 'normal' baking-time I tested a tip from 'dmsnyder'. He wrote somewhere here that after baking he let his bread cool down a while in the oven with the door a little bit open. I did this for 20 mn and think, it works for me! Thx David! This bread is very delicious. Hard, splintering crust, soft, creamy crumb, complex taste from the PF and a fine scent from the smoked potato granules. Like a vegan ham-sandwich! ;-) happy baking rudi
I made a rye bread with shredded carrots while being a test baker for Stanley Ginsberg's Rye Baker book and that came out better than I expected.  I'm not a big carrot cake fan, but I do love roasted caramelized carrots, which are sweet like candy.  I used some special multi-colored purple, yellow, and orange carrots and roasted them in some olive oil until they were nice and soft and sweet.  I mashed them up before adding them in the dough and I was not disappointed with the final bread.  It came out moist with just a little hint of sweetness from the carrots.  This is one of those bakes you can eat just by itself with nothing on it, but it does go well with cheese and was perfect to dip in the Instant Pot sausage, peppers and beans we made last night :). Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the water called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients, in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the water is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the water  and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Peel and cut the carrots into medium to small size pieces and toss in some olive oil.  Place on a sheet pan and roast at 425 F until soft and slightly charred.  Let cool until ready to use and mash using a potato masher . If using your own milled flour, mill and sift as desired.  Next, mix the flours, porridge and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, carrots and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 hour.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 550 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I needed some rolls to eat with all the food we've been cooking with our Instant Pot and figured I would make a version of one of my favorites.  Cream cheese always makes for a nice soft crumb and the addition of the maple syrup in the porridge added a little extra sweetness to go along with the honey. These came out great with a nice soft flavorful crumb.  I used some white and black poppy seeds to top some of the rolls and also used some powdered cheese and some garlic spice mix for some of the others.  I used some scissor cuts on some of the rolls just to make them pretty. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.  You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk along with the maple syrup and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, cream cheese, honey and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.      You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape into rolls around 125 - 135 grams each.  Place on a baking sheet with parchment paper and place a moist lint free towel on top or use plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 500 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 435 degrees.  Bake for 35 minutes until the rolls are nice and brown. Take the rolls out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I had a full load of 8 cast iron pots in the oven this morning. I had four of my Heart Bread loaves to bake for a customer, and I've been waiting for an opportunity to bake some of Ian's cream cheese breads, and I also added a couple of Tartine Porridge loaves to top up the load - this one made with Kamut flake porridge, walnuts and walnut oil (bought some the other day). They all turned out very pretty, and the Kamut Durum Potato Cream Cheese sourdough is soooo yummy! Good baking morning... :)
Cell phones rock for casual photography! Well, time flies.  It's interesting to read "where I was at" 10 years ago with bread and it reminds me of where I was at with life.  I was living in Canada and approaching bread baking as a hobby.  Things were very different.  Now I live in México and I regularly bake my house bread with no variations except that I occasionally bake a loaf of rye that lasts quite a while in the freezer.  Today I'm passing on my load of bread books (sans 3) to the local cooking club.  I am very comfortable with my starter, I always bake with it, I now know what "crumb" is, and I critically review every bake.  My main problem these days is shaping.  I often get loaves that are constricted in places and blown-out in other places.  My most recent bake went pretty well, shaping-wise.  We like a small, tall loaf, good for toasting.  My other difficulty is that no matter how I try it, when I slash the tops of loaves prior to baking the skin wrinkles.  It usually straightens-out when the loaves are baked and they bloom properly in the oven.  Proofing remains something of a mystery.  How does one judge when loaves have doubled or are at 90% or whatever?  Judging the dough in a container is easy as there are marks on the container, but once the loaves have gone through all their processes and are proofing in the couch... well it's a mystery to me.  In retrospect I'm so grateful that I found this website.  It's full of friendly, knowledgeable people.  Maybe some day I'll get back to breadsloration (bread exploration), but for now I'm sticking to the tried and true house bread.
Well the pics tell the story but here goes for some more details. 350g very very young spelt levain 100%( fermented only about 4-5 hrs) 660g KA bread flour 90g Kamut 50g fresh milled rye 22g Kosher salt 20g maple syrup/20g yogurt 500g water ( 300g apple yeast water 200g water) I put all the flour and the yogurt and maple syrup with the  YW/Water mix together with just enough spatula work to get it wet. Placed covered bowl in the oven with the light on and door propped a bit open so warm but not too warm. Left it several hours till puffy and the young levain was also puffy and full of bubbles. A note about this. I took the  160 g water and 160g  spelt flour and added it to 18 grams very firm rye starter from my NMNF cache. I did not do multi feedings I did nothing...mixed it and set it in the warm oven with the bowl. I removed the bowl and sprinkled the salt on the dough and sprayed it till quite damp with water. I then did about 30-40 gentle turns with the spatula just to get it folded in. I folded in the levain using just enough gentle turns to get it mixed in. I then covered the bowl and placed it back in the warm oven. I waited a couple more hours. You can see the bubbles on the dough. I scraped it out onto a well floured counter. I did two s and f one right after the other....that was it...Nothing, absolutely nothing else. I placed it in the oiled container and DID NOT leave it out anymore. I placed it directly in a cold fridge. You can see it easily doubled and more by this morning. I removed  the cold dough from the container. Divided into two 800g pieces. The rolls were barely shaped while cold  to preserve the puffiness so somewhat free-form. The batard was also barely touched. It was cold and all I did was lightly sprinkle the seam side with coarse rye flour . I then pinched the seam together. No preshape, no rest, no shaping at all. Just folded the edges together and pinched. Placed seam side down in rice/flour banneton. Plastic bag and into the oven with light on and the pan of rolls. Left to rise one hour. Baked the rolls first at 500 for 10 min and 475 for 10 min. They are brushed with egg yolk/half and half and sesame seeds sprinkled on. Misted a couple times with water in first 10 min. They are amazing...had a ham and cheese on one and husband had house cured pastrami from our son...so yum !! The batard was baked in my trusty roaster that was preheated 10 min at 500.Loaf turned out on parchment and lowered into hot roaster.  Loaf baked with two  ice cubes for steam thrown in bottom of hot pan for 10 min at 500 lid on, 10 min at 475 lid on and 20 min lid off. Crumb shot of bread will be tomorrow...I am taking it to our Buddhist meditation get together. I hope this lenghty description will help to further the " almost no hands on" technique of gluten development. It has certainly converted me. There is no reason to do much of anything. Nature takes its course with little interference. I have a fig/raisin banana yw that will have cinnamon in it to see how that does with the no hands treatment. More to come tomorrow. after the salt and levain were added and it rested in a warm oven....you can see the bubbles in the dough after only two stretch and folds into bucket for the night wow...look at that dough growth all in the fridge...no room temp time at all out of tub onto floured counter ready to divide batard in banneton seam down batard ready to be turned out after 1 hr rising you crack me up... wow....what BIG ears you have :) rolls risen and glazed and ready for oven rolls baked roll crumb
I have been tinkering, experimenting with various porridge breads for the past while; various attempts to create a lighter crumb, more custardy texture, deriving different flavours in the breads using various porridge mixtures while trying to keep a solid nutritional profile with the fresh milled grains and additions, using younger levains, varying final dough hydration. But sometime I just want a good porridge bread, like the one I first discovered working my way through Chad Robertson's Tartine 3...today was one of those days  Nothing complicated, this is an oat porridge bread made with fresh milled Red Fife (25%), filtered water (75%), young levain (22%), sea salt (2.2%), oat porridge addition (20%) after the third series of stretch and folds; FDH was probably about 80% after addition of the porridge.  Cold proofed overnight and baked in a Creuset covered 500 F/22 minutes; 450 F/10 minutes and uncovered out of the pots directly on the oven stone 450 F/20 minutes. Simple is often the best...
This is my attempt at the loaf that Bread1965 was trying to recreate quite a while ago. I was able to get my hands on the real version of this bread and it is delicious! In this recipe, I tried to be faithful to the order of the ingredients listed on the package. The last 4 ingredients always puzzled me because they were after the salt until I clued in one day that they are used for the topping and are not in the bread. That would explain the tiny amounts. Recipe: 100 g of rye berries 968 g of unbleached flour + 37 g 75 g golden raisins 75 g dark raisins 50 g canola oil 25 g ground brown flax seeds 25 g toasted brown flax seeds 50 g toasted golden flax seeds 50 g honey 25 g dried apples 25 g raisin juice concentrate (recipe follows) 650 g water + 20 g 22 g pink Himalayan salt 250 g levain (80% hydration)(Instructions included below) Topping 10 g rolled oats 10 g sunflower seeds 10 g brown flax seeds 10 g poppy seeds Raisin Juice 2 cups (260 g) raisins 4 cups boiling water The loaves really did not rise very much in the fridge and the oven spring was adequate, but not impressive. I am sure that a lot of this was due to the stiff dough. Next time, I will definitely increase the hydration as the raisins and flax absorbed a lot of the liquids. And just for Bread1965 who insisted I stay true to the original in shape and otherwise, I did make one batard by cutting one batch in half and I followed Trail Runner’s method of baking in a granite wear roaster. I also added a bit of water under the parchment paper. This whole method worked very well. Overall, the loaves have a nice colour to them and feel lighter than I expected considering how much stuff is in them. I am very curious to see the crumb. I suspect it might be fairly closed but then, that is what the original is like. Hopefully, it tastes as good as the original. And this is what we woke up to this morning!
Been away a few weeks 'cheating' with a few hybrid loaves, Hamelman and Forkish's books are full of sourdough recipes with a pinch of commercial yeast. It feels a bit wrong... But tastes so right! It's like playing pool after playing snooker, still great fun but seems too easy. I stuck rigidly to Forkish's recipe, although not so much to his timings. I utilised the fridge overnight after maybe six hours on the counter and allowed an hour's warm-up before shaping this morning. The hydration worried me a little at 78% but it was surprisingly easy to handle, the kitchens pretty cool right now which I'm sure helped. Blonde, you can see what inspired the name. The loaves are very pretty to look at and range from straw yellow to a dark bronze like a sunset. Aesthetically perhaps my finest to date. The oven spring was pretty special, this batard almost ripped itself in two! I've become obsessed with heavily sour, rye levains lately and this one didn't quite tick the flavour box in that respect but then it doesn't mean too. It has a gentle tang and it is tasty, just not my favourite. Lovely crispy crust and soft light crumb. It was just warm when I cut it, early for me I usually allow an overnight cool before cutting but had to treat myself tonight. Thanks for looking.
Basically the same process as the last bake. So little hands on that it is amazing to see what the dough becomes with just time and two s and f's. The one thing I will change is I won't be doing a bulk ferment any longer. I remember why I hate having to wait around for the dough to get warmed up and risen before baking. I will shape and retard in the banneton.  I like baking the cold dough as it is so easy to get out of the banneton. Other than that I won't change any of the technique . It all went flawlessly. I found a way to add cinnamon without placing it in the dough. I don't soak my dried fruit but I do mist it several times as I am working in the kitchen and keep it covered to get it hydrated. This time I misted and also tossed it with 8grams of cinnamon. Wow...the fragrance!  I stole a piece of raisin off one of the loaves and it tastes great. It doesn't get the flavor all through the loaf but I do have pockets of sweet cinnamony goodness now in the bread. 500g KA bread flour 250g Red Fife flour 250g Kamut 400g Spelt levain 100% hydration ( added more flour and water to leftovers from yesterday and let it go about 4 hrs - young levain) 320g milk ( I didn't have fresh so made double strength powdered milk ) 50g maple syrup 50g yogurt 320 g Banana Yeast Water 20g Kosher salt 8g cinnamon on about 250g  diced dried figs and crimson raisins and hydrated by misting. Mixed flours, milk and YW  ,syrup and yogurt . Used as few strokes as needed to hydrate all. Covered and set in warm 80 degrees F oven. Left till puffy. about 3 hrs. Folded in damp salt with few strokes and then folded in all levain. Covered and left in same 80 degree F oven till quite puffy about 3 hrs. Removed and did 2 s and f. On the last S and F folded in the fruit. Placed in oiled bucket and left overnight. More than doubled. Removed and shaped cold using the pinch a seam method , nothing more. Took about 2 1/2 hrs to rise up. Bake preheated for 15 min  roaster at 500 -10 min covered, 475-10 min covered and 475- 20 min uncovered. Threw in 2 icecubes at the start. crumb banana yeast water young spelt levain folding levain into dough about 50% done folding after the dough with levain has rested turned out dough on floured counter ready for s and f after 1 fold after 2 folds macerated dried fruit after retarding in bucket all night cold 34 degree F refrigerator shaped cold loaves ready to rise risen and ready to bake turned out of banneton ready to bake baked loaf
This bread was inspired by some post on Facebook some time ago. Since the "Eclipse Challenge" I never used the charcoal colour in the bread and therefore I thought that it's time to practice a bit with decorative scoring. The recipe for the bread is simple - strong bread flour, about 63% hydration and 20% inoculation, bulk ferment for about 3 hours and cold final proofing in the fridge for 24 hours. The white dusting was done with bread flour and scored with a razor, baked in iron cast skillet. Although the crumb might look unpleasant to somebody there is no change in taste and if one would eat this bread in the darkness he would never notice any difference. Actually the crumb is very lacy, puffy and soft for such low hydration.
Another version of decorative bread scoring with zebra pattern, this time on a 100% semola rimacinata loaf with 70% hydration and 15% inoculation, cold retarded for about 10 hours only. My oldest grandson is a big fan of "Pane di Altamura", so I like to bake the bread from semola rimacinata to make him happy. Actually I got only semola flour so I used my home mill to re-mill it twice and get rimacinata flour. The crumb was extremely soft and puffy. Happy baking!Joze
I have been practicing for several months the scoring and this one seems to have worked. This is a 80% bread flour , 20% spelt flour with 75% hydration.
I used recipe for Challah from Hamelman's book "Bread" for preparing the dough. The only difference was that I used milk instead of water. The dough is on stiiff side so it is relatively easy to work with it. I did 5 strand braid for the bottom, the middle one was 4 strand and the top one 3 strand. The weight of the dough for one strand in the bottom braid was 130g, middle none 115g and top one 100g. The decorations were made from dough for pasta without egg (flour 150g, oil - 2 tablespoon, water - enough to get smooth but very stiff dough, 3g salt - 2%). For the final I used egg wash but this was done somewhere in the middle of the bake when the dough already stopped raising. Actually this was my second braided bread in my life and I am really happy that I god a gold award for it on sa state level assessment of braided breads. Happy baking! Joze
This has got to be the absolutely best way to caramelize a bunch of onions (in this case, about 8 largish ones). Last night I sliced them all with the mandoline (still made me cry), filled up my crock pot and tossed them by hand with a few tablespoons of olive oil and a bit of salt. They cooked overnight (about 10 hours) on low, then a couple more hours with the lid partly off to cook down the liquid. I'll now freeze them in 100 gram batches for use in all kinds of things! So, other than pizza (already planned), what are your favourite bready things to make with caramelized onions?
This is a popular flavor I do for our local farmers market. The loaves are packed with pimento cheese (that a friend makes,) and topped with a dutch crunch that uses corn grits instead of rice flour. These things are dang tasty. Please excuse formatting, the formulas are cut and pasted from my recipe spreadsheet. Grits Dutch Crunch Recipe (prepare the day before) Mix all ingredients and mix to combine. Let ferment at room temp until risen slightly and it looks and smells fermented. The amount of water may vary depending on your grits. Add enough water so make a thick paste, not a stiff batter or dough. Extra crunch paste does ok in the fridge for a day or so but will brown up too dark after that. Pimento Cheese Bread 2 pints of pimento cheese (I didn't weigh this, I just put in what I had bought. Could go more, could go less) Scale the first four ingredients and mix to homogenize. Scale the salt into a small vessel and set aside. Scale the water into a large bowl. Ladle a small amount of the water over the salt, and set aside Autolyse 30 min to overnight (I do all my dough overnight as I am hand mixing) Add the active sourdough starter and mix to incorporate. If you did a short autolyse, develop your dough's gluten in the desired fashion. Rest the dough one hour before incorporating the reserved salt and water mixture. Bulk ferment the dough 3-6 hours depending on ambient conditions. Stretch & fold the dough every thirty minutes for the first 2 hours, then as needed throughout bulk. Add the pimento cheese during the second set of folds. Scale the dough at 360 g, with the added cheese you should get 8 or 9 pieces. Pre shape, rest 20 minutes,  then shape into little boules. Transfer the dough to baskets to proof. I do mine overnight in the fridge. When the loaves are ready, transfer to the dutch oven, sprtiz with water and spread on the pre prepared dutch crunch in a thin layer. I've tried these both slashed and not slashed. I think they look nicer without being slashed. Bake your breads in preheated dutch ovens at 550F for 10 minutes. Reduce the heat to 475, rotate the pans, and bake an additional 10 minutes with the lid on. Remove the lid and bake 4-5 minutes more, until the Dutch Crunch is a nice, reddish, golden brown. Cool 20 minutes before eating, trust me I burned my mouth.
This is 100% spelt bread - 10% whole-grain spelt flour home milled, 90% white spelt flour, 70% hydration, 10% inoculation. I tested a new approach in making this bread - no autolize, no "fermentolize", just mixing all ingredients including salt at slow speed and after 3 minutes at higher speed for gluten development until the dough didn't stick any more to the walls of the bowl of my Kitchen Aid mixer - about 2-3 minutes more. 4 stretch and folds, preshape, shaping using stitching method and our on counter before short cold retard as we needed the bread for breakfast. Baked in iron-cast skillet the standard way 30 minutes covered. Due to extensible gluten property of spelt gluten I decided to completely skip autolyse or fermentolyse and just mix the dough and develop gluten right away. I think this approach paid off as the crumb is very nicely evenly opened. Happy baking, Joze
So, I made a big pot of caramelized onions the other day, and wanted to try various recipes. I was also inspired by a discussion we had about using beer in sourdough. So that serendipity of events led to a bake of Hamelman's Beer bread with added caramelized onions! This is a nice sourdough (or rather, a hybrid) that uses a liquid bread flour levain, a stiff rye sour and a bit of dry yeast (so you can make and bake on the same day). The beer is used as part of the main dough water. Hamelman uses a dark ale, but I used my hubby's homemade stout. It's a lovely dough - smooth, stretchy and strong. I added the onions (100 grams to the recipe which makes around 1800 grams of dough) during a last couple of stretch and folds (the dough is made in a mixer, including the first 'stretch & folds' done by running the mixer for a few seconds every 20 minutes). After about a 2 hour bulk ferment I scaled the dough into three smallish loaves of just under 600 grams each, and put them into bannetons to proof. I needed to go out for a bit, so I popped them into plastic bags and into the fridge. When I got to them about three hours later they were quite well-proofed, probably about at peak. They did hold their shape fairly well on the peels and after slashing. There wasn't a lot of oven spring, as I don't think there was much 'push' left in the dough, but it still expanded a bit in the oven and held it's shape well. I had some toasted for lunch today, and we had some with our pea soup for dinner tonight. Lovely bread - good flavour, moist chewy crumb, nice crust. The onions basically melted into the dough, but the aroma and flavour were there. I will definitely make it again!
This bread contains 20% of buckwheat flour and 80% of strong bread flour (in my case it was Italian Costa d'Amalfi). Hydration about 75% and cold retarded. The procedure is as follows: slightly roast the buckwheat flour in a pan until starts smelling and then scald it with all water from the recipe, wait until it cools down and then add bread flour, salt and starter and mix by hand until all ingredients are well incorporated. After 30 minutes rest period use scoop & stretch method or French slaps and develop gluten and then perform stretch & folds every hour until you are through bulk fermentation. I shape it using stitching method and the cold retard and bake it as you bake any other sourdough bread. You can add walnuts or pecans, what gives this  bread even more taste. Happy baking! Joze
I  will be travelling away from Australia to Europe later this year  and looking for some s/d starter to use on my adventure, meeting other bakers is also great fun. I will be staying in Huddersfield (UK) but also Guizerex in the Sth of France,  Barga in Tuscany and also Rome in Italy Time frame is May - June.  Not long now Kind regards Derek
Good days folks I have been trying to make a regular white bread for the past year that would not have those millions little little air bubbles and tiny holes inside the bread. Can someone please assist in how to eliminate or drastically reduce the air bubbles and little hole inside the bread
I've been very busy with university life recently but I'm glad I was able to squeeze in this bake, it relieved all of the stress that I've been experiencing for the past few weeks.Most think that the Chinese eat rice but it's only true in the south. In the north, wheat is the staple and people consume in the form of noodles and bread with steamed buns as the most common bread. Sourdough is also the traditional levening but from what I've read, sour bread do not fit Chinese tastes so an alkali is added to the dough to neutralize the acid and provide extra leavening. In Guandong which is in the south the popular dim sum steamed bun is sweet, soft and fluffy, very different from the northern mantou which is almost always unsweetened, dense with a very toothsome texture because it functions as a staple food just like European rustic breads. Chinese "baked" breads have fascinated me unlike in Europe where most if not all baking are made in a wood-fired oven, Chinese breads utilize a vast array of "primitive" (most folks today consider it that way) baking technology (a lot of makeshift equipment) that I find inventive and ingenious.Guo Kui is an umbrella of various breads popular in the north and the Chinese Northwest; different breads in terms of look, size and cooking method but under one name. Most of my Chinese friends are northerners specifically from Xi'an in Shaanxi province and they recognize and have fond memories of this bread. I made an approximation of this bread from their description (which is of course an awesome language practice opportunity) and some internet research. It is dense and chewy, crusty and crispy, with a charred spotted appearance sometimes with a decorative imprint. It is like that because it is commonly paired with juicy fillings otherwise it will disintegrate. The most striking change I made is using sourdough which not that popular anymore in China.I fermented the dough for 5 hours then divided them into 4 rounds then a 1 hour proof at room temperature then into the fridge overnight. The next day, I flattened them a bit then made several cuts on their sides using a cleaver then pressed them with my "decorative" stamp. I cooked them on a skillet 1 minute on each side then they went into my preheated claypot on top of the pebbles then baked for a further 10 minutes, 5 minutes on each side.They were very fragrant from the clay pot, having a wheaty tangy smell with a wonderful smoky aroma. Flavor is wheaty, sweet with a nice tang. It dense but soft and just a little chewy, the crust was delightfully crisp and caramelized. Man, those pebbles give my breads a distinct flavor and aroma that you can't find anywhere else! I was boiling them yesterday to remove any gunk that may have accumulated over time and after boiling they smelt smoky and reminiscent of pineapples and raisins. Those are what they give to my breads and even hours after baking breads, they still smell like that and just greet my nose with an appetizing aroma. I think this is my new favorite method for baking rustic breads now; minimal burnt spots. I was also happy that the imprint showed through the bake. We really liked the bread just the way it is and I think it is perfect for heavy fillings. I'm excited to tweak it further like making it more sour or experimenting with different sweet and savory fillings..What is better to pair with this delicious bread? Homemade egg noodles! With fried sauce! I made them today as well before baking the bread. I really feel like I am in Northern China. I was already a bit emotional and overwhelmed while eating them that I forgot take a picture of them together. :) The noodles were soft and delicate and the sauce packs a punch even though there is no meat in there. A perfect match with the guo kui for a filling meal.
This is my first blog entry and porridge sourdough. I have started baking bread for less than a year and they are almost all no-knead overnight artisan bread. Since the start of this year, I have been trying my hand at sourdough as I successfully made a starter at the first attempt. Though, as a year 1 student, time is not something I have a lot to sparse so all of my loaf are essentially no-knead, stretch and fold type. This is my first trial of porridge sourdough inspired by the Polenta and Rosemary Sourdough from The Perfect Loaf. 100% whole wheat polenta rosemary porridge sourdough For polenta 40 g stone ground cornmeal (medium grain) 200 g water Bring the water to a boil and pour the cornmeal to the pot. Take the pot off the fire and let stand covered for an hour. pour the mixture through a sieve and remove as much starchy liquid as possible by swirling it with a spoon. Let cool to room temperature or refrigerate until needed. For Dough All of the polenta 190 g whole wheat flour 190 g water (don't add all at once. I always substitute all with whey since I have leftover from homemade yogurt) 20 g 100% hydration sourdough starter (mine is half whole rye and half whole wheat) 1 tbsp vital wheat gluten (omit at own risk) 3/4 tsp salt 1/2 tsp rosemary extra cornmeal for dusting Combine all ingredients in a large bowl with a large spoon util roughly combined, adjust the whey/water added accordingly. Let sit overnight for 14 hours (my house is very warm at the moment at 24°C so your dough may take longer to be ready, alternatively, you may increase the % of starter used). Gently take the dough out of the bowl with the help of a scraper and stretch and fold it for 2 rounds. Let rest for 20 minutes. Perform 3 sets of stretch and fold over a 1.5-3 hour period, depending on the room temperature (mine take only 1.5 hours), leaving the dough untouched for at least 0.5 hour. After the last round of stretch and fold, shape it into your desired shape and roll it over a cornmeal dusted table. This dough is more structurally weak than other dough I worked with before so I supported it with a linen cloth. Preheat the oven at 250°C  with a cast iron pan and an additional pan. Score and mist the dough and transfer it to the preheated cast iron pan. Bake at a 250°C/480°F oven with steam (I pour half a cup of water in a hot baking sheet) for 10-15 minutes. Remove the pan (one for creating steam) from the oven the turn it down to 220°C/430°F and bake for a further 10-20 minutes or util the bread reach a minimum of 200°F. The crumb is very moist and chewy with distinctive rosemary aroma. The crust is extra crunchy with the cornmeal. Since I slightly over hydrated and proofed the dough, my scoring failed so I am not attaching a crust photo.
I baked this bread for my daughter. She is suffering from gluten intolerance problems. The mix of GF flours is like this: I added 5% of psyllium and 2% of salt. The 200 grams of seeds (sesame, flax, sunflower and pumpkin) were soaked for several hours in hot water (100% hydration). Procedure: 1.) Use yeast water to make a 2 stage leaven from the mixture of flours. To speed up the process add 1 tablespoon of molasses.  Start with 50g of YW and 50g of flour mixture and when doubles add again 50g of YW and flour mixture. Alternate option is to z+use active dry yeast. 2.) Soak the seeds in hot water few hours ahead of mixing time. 2.) Use about 200g of water and heat it to boiling and scald the flour mixture (all flours except flax and Schaer mixB). 3.) Add about 250g of water to the leaven and psyllium and let it rest for about 30 minutes. 5.) Mix all ingredients together - all scalded flour which has already cooled down and the rest of the flours, soaked seeds and leaven with added psyllium and add 2% of salt. 6.) Mix this in a mixer for about 8-10 minutes on a slow speed. Add water as needed to get not so stiff dough - the hydration without soaker should be about 80% or more. 7.) Transfer this into proofing bowl and let it rise at least 50%, but you can leave to almost double. 8.) Shape the boule and put it in proofing basket and wait until raises about 70% and then bake it. 9.) Bake it like any gluten bread with steam for about 45-50 minutes at same temperatures. The finished loaf might have tendency to collapse a bit. You should do a bit of scoring. Happy baking, Joze
This is a very tasty bread with 30% of barley flour, 30% of rye flour and 40% strong bread flour. Procedure: 1.) Prepare 20% of leaven at 100% hydration (could be with white flour or rye flour) 2.) Mix all ingredients flour+water+leaven +2% of salt  (no autolyse) and develop the gluten right away after you mix on low speed for about 3 minutes. 3.) Do series of S&F in 30-45 minutes intervals. 4.) The bread on the picture was cold retarded for 20 hours. Bake as you normally bake your breads, nothibg special required. Happy baking, Joze
Hi Freshloafers just wondering if anyone has mixed dough, then put in in the fridge for a bulk retarding and did the stretch and folds the next day in the morning, and then divide, pre shape, shape and for a midday bake thanks in advance for any thoughts/insight MJ Sourdoigh
Hello Everyone, I posted once on one of the very old thread and I think its better that I start a blog on my croissant adventure as I think I need to note down what works and what not works.  I too hope that I will be able to get some tips and advice from all the experts too. My first attempt in making croissant at home.  Used 100% bread flour and I think my laminating skill with a rolling pin wasn't great.  Secondly, I think I didn't proof enough even though it was more than 2 hours.  I used the recipe from Yuval Ayalon.  The outcome was breadlike. On my 2nd attempt, I changed the flour by using 80% bread flour and 20% AP flour.  I also use put the dough in the freezer after every turn.  Next, I try to proved it longer, more than 2 hours before I baked it.  I can see the potential of the honeycomb texture but still, it was NOT really a croissant which one will buy in the bakery. My 3rd attempt...changed the ratio of the flour to 50%-50%.  Stretched the freezing a little longer (30 mins) after every turn.  I also proved it longer (nearly 31/2 hours) and finally I could see the honeycomb texure.  I am so happy and excited but of course, I still have a long way to go.  But right now, I am just so happy. Wish me good luck!!!Cheers, ketupat
I loved Trailrunner’s “Look ma, almost no hands…” bread method and decided to give it a shot. This bread is almost the same recipe, but scaled to making three loaves and with the addition of some flax.  The ingredient list is similar to Trevor’s European Peasant loaf so I decided to have some fun with names and call this a Canadian Settler loaf because of the inclusion of maple syrup in it. Carolyn, I hope that you don’t mind me renaming your bread! So to start off, I began by following Carolyn’s method but I just couldn’t resist throwing in a few folds during the bulk fermentation and I ended up doing my usual pre-shape, rest and final shape. I also took her advice and did the proof in the fridge rather than the bulk fermentation. I did have to add more water than her original recipe because of my very thirsty flour and I couldn’t get things mixed using just a spatula. I ended up diving in using my hand to be able to first get the flour wet enough for the autolyse and then later, to mix in the salt and the levain. I really think that my Canadian flour absorbs a lot more water than others around the world as my dough never seems to be as wet as what I see in pictures here, especially at the autolyse stage. It takes a lot of squishing and working to get all of the flour wet and I often have to add 50 or so grams of water to be able to get that shaggy dough. And I almost forgot, this is my first foray back into yeast water since baking a few bricks a couple of years ago. I made two yeast waters, one with raisins and one with apples. The raisin yeast water seemed to activate more quickly than the apple but I am unsure of what it is supposed to look like when you use it. Is it carbonated like pop or soda? All the raisins were floating and there were some bubbles but the liquid itself did not look carbonated at all when I used it. The apples floated the whole time so hard to tell when that one was ready. I figured that it was good enough after a week in a warm spot. I didn’t have time to do a test with flour and figured that with almost 18% prefermented flour, it wouldn’t be a disaster if the YW wasn’t ready. Both smelled amazing though with that piece of orange peel in it. One wouldn’t think that using a bit of orange peel would make such a difference but it does. So here is what I did: 210 g spelt berries 113 g kamut berries 63 g rye berries 825 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax (got this idea from one of Mutantspace’s recipes) 25 g maple syrup 30 g plain yogurt 425 g yeast water (I did about half raisin and half apple) 200 g filtered water 22 g salt 430 g 2 stage 100 % hydration levain (method follows below) I was very pleased to see great oven spring! I think I might have been over fermenting my dough since I seem to be getting much better oven spring when I let it go only 25 to 30%. We will see what the crumb looks like when I cut them open. This write up is already long enough but unfortunately, I am not done, in case you made it down this far. Ha ha! Only four loaves out of the 8 that I have for sale were spoken for and I do have a friend that only buys bread if it has fruit in it, so since it was her birthday on Friday, I decided to make one batch with fruit. In addition to the above recipe, at the autolyse stage, I threw in 25 g poppy seeds, 25 g hemp hearts, 75 g chopped medjool dates and 75 g cranberries as well as an additional 50 g of water since the add-ins absorbed a fair bit of the hydration. Otherwise, the recipe and method is the same as above. Here it is fresh out of the oven. I tried to give credit for techniques and ideas so that we can see how much we influence each other in our baking. There are many others such as Minioven, CedarMountain, Ian, Bread1965, Rue, Icedemeter, and Leslie just to name a few that I haven’t mentioned in this post but have definitely impacted my thinking and practice. Pretty amazing really!
Hi... cracked my clay clouche( spritzed water on dough..bad idea). Does any one know if cracked base can b repaired or just chalk it up lost and buy a new one.   Thanks
This is a very rustic bread using roasted baby red potatoes and roasted sweet potatoes.  For the red potatoes I mashed them up and added them skins and all.  You can see some whole pieces of potato sticking out in the crumb shots below. I used fresh milled whole spelt without sifting and rye which I sifted with #40 mesh and after re-sifting the hard bits I added them back in after the final mix was complete. The potatoes added approximately 148 grams of water which is not indicated in the formulas hydration, so this was a much higher hydrated dough than it appears. I also added some freshly made Greek Yogurt to add some softness to the crumb. I was very pleased with the flavor and crumb on this bake.  It was nice and soft and chock full of flavor with a moderately open crumb.  Definitely one worth making again. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours, barley flakes, potatoes,yogurt and 85% or so, of the water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 1 hour.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), olive oil and the rest of the water and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Now add the remaining sifted bran back into the dough and mix for a few seconds.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 1.5 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (If you have a proofer you can set it to 80 degrees and follow above steps but you should be finished in 1 hour). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 hour (Spelt tends to proof very quickly, so if you don't use Spelt I would leave the dough out for 1.5 to 2 hours).    Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take about 1 hour depending on your room temperature (if not using Spelt it will take 1.5 to 2 hours).  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 520 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
well I am astounded at the results of this bake. Even more simple than any others of late. Small amount of  hands on involved and amazing oven spring for so little effort. Will post crumb later...having a dinner party in an hour so need to get scooting ! Refreshed Starter, 100% hydration*:  150 gramsTotal Flour**:  485 grams Water:  330g Sea Salt:  11 grams Borrowed this formula from Girl meets dirt a blog that is interesting if you want to take a look. I of course did some changes to the formula. I used a fresh ground young rye levain at some hydration . I don't keep track of how much flour or water I add. I just make it feel right when I stir it. I used all unbleached KA bread flour. I doubled all the amounts. Of the 660g total of water there was 200 g of AYW and 460 g H2O. I added  more water to get the mix as soft as I like it. All was stirred together except the salt and placed in the oven with light on. When it was puffy in about 2 hrs. I took it out and folded in the salt with misted water at several intervals as I added the salt. Since 1 tsp adds 1 percent of hydration who knows how much I had :) ? I then set the dough back in the oven with light on. After one hour I took it out and did one s and f. It was pretty wet so I was glad I floured the board. Put it all back for another hour. Did one more s and f. Felt like it needed more time so set it back again. Was almost at double by then. Took it out and did one gentle s and f and included some ground flax seeds. Not toasted or soaked and probably only about 25g since I am experimenting with them. Made a batard and one boule....thought better of it and cut 300g off the batard and made a baby boule . Placed in banneton and directly in fridge. Baked in 500 degree preheated granite ware roaster. 500 degrees 10 min with 4 ice cubes ( note I have doubled the amount) tossed under the paper lid on.  475 degrees 10 min lid on. And then 20 min 475 lid off. Temp 212. This is my first loaves in forever with this much white. So we shall see the crumb etc. baby boule
As several other member's have bit the Abel bug I thought it's about time to give it a shot. This was a half ditched effort since I couldn't locate my loaf tins and so had to go free form. Not disappointed, thos of course was an unfocused experiment more-or-less just to see how it would turn out as a side bake against croissants with more attention to the croissants. Since they (croissants) take a good bit of oven kick, I think the pain vienoisse turned out a little too dark - I even removed it from the oven at around minute 5 to allow the croissants to take on he heat and then returned it later at a lower temp. Problem was that after 5 minutes it was already a bit too dark. I think this loaf needs a super short hot kick as in 3 minutes around 425 then a longer warm bake say 20-25 at around 375. That's what I would soon the next take. But anyway here's the results for those interested ;)
This is an improved version of my gluten free 100% buckwheat bread leavened with yeast water. The recipe was tested many times from different enthusiasts and always gave a very good result. It might happen that you will not get so open crumb in first attempt, but the bread will still be tasty and soft like a cake as it contains no gluten. You can use any active yeast water. PROCEDURE: 1.) Prepare the leaven - The leaven is built in two stages. Start with 50% of flour and 50% of yeast water – so with 100g of flour and 150g of yeast water. When doubles add the rest of flour and yeast water and wait until doubles again. You can use any active yeast water. 2.) Add the water from the main dough part to the leaven and psyllium and let ferment from 30 - 60 minutes. Then add the buckwheat flour and salt and mix well for at least few minutes on a low speed or mix with hand. Now you can add seeds, walnuts, … 3.) Leave the dough to rest for about 30 minutes and mix with hand for about a minute. Repeat this step again after resting of 30 minutes. 4.) Form a loaf and put it into the proofing basket and let it rise until it almost doubles what might take about 3-5 hours. 5.) Bake in preheated oven at 240 dC covered or with a lot of steam for 10 minutes, then reduce the temperature to 220 dC and bake it for 40 minutes. After that uncover it and bake for next 10 to max 20 minutes. For this last part you may reduce the temperature if the loaf is already well brown. Happy baking, Joze
Hi.  I have this book.  Made country batard and buckwheat round.  Horrible.  Not edible.  Could not cut it with an axe.  Inside thin and gummy.  Read and re-read book.  Can anyone help?  Thanks in advance.  Loretta
I came across a recipe for Cranberry Sourdough on the Breadwerx website yesterday and decided to give it a try. Although the oven spring was a little lacking every other aspect of the bread was amazing. Definitely one of the best tasting breads I have made and I recommend everyone else giving this a try. Trevor's videos and recipes are so easy to follow and I have always used them as a basis for my recipes since I started baking.
Made this this morning...finally got the hang of slashes..
Well, the battle continues as I wage my own personal HOL-E war.. Life has been hectic and I've not been baking as much as I'd like, but I was able to get a bake in this weekend.  Too many things going on so I ended up using my starter a bit past peak (started to fall). Which is amazing considering I fed it 12 hours earlier with just over 1:4:4 and kept it in a mid 70 degree warm cupboard spot above a heating vent for the night.. 150g of 100% hydration starter using AP flour 300g water 425 flour (250g bread; 150g whole wheat; 25g buckwheat) A short autolyse, the regular routine of stretch and folds and a very long bulk. I started around 10am, finished my stretch and folds by noon and at 3pm had to head out so I put it in the fridge (it looked like it had almost doubled at that point) and when I returned around 6pm did a quick shape and retarded overnight. I was trying to push my bulk further than normal. It didn't expand too much more over night - maybe 10/15% more.  it was just a bit more dough than my combo cooker could handle but I stuffed it in there and put the lid on.  I think I'll reduce the dough volume by about 20% to give the dough more space next time. Overall little to complain about - crumb was good and I'm increasingly getting better at creating a more open crumb per Trevor's open crumb mastery method.. but I'm far from anything resembling mastery! This clearly is moving in the right direction and is the most open crumb I've made using Trevor's method. The longer bulk fermentation made a difference in helping opening up the crumb. The starter could have been used a bit sooner. Getting there.. I'm not sure I'm a buckwheat fan, but I had some flour and used it. I think I'll use that flour for crepes going forward. The battle continues..
Combine all ingredients except the nuts/seeds in a large bowl with a large spoon util roughly combined, adjust the whey/water added accordingly. Let sit overnight for 10 hours. Gently take the dough out of the bowl with the help of a scraper and fold it the cooled porridge and nuts/seeds. Let rest for 30 minutes. Perform 3 sets of stretch and fold over a 1.5-3 hour period, depending on the room temperature (mine toke 30+30+45minutes). Preheat the oven at 250°C with a cast iron pan and an additional pan with wet towels. Score the dough and transfer it to the preheated cast iron pan. Bake at a 250°C/480°F oven with steam (I pour half a cup of hot water to the towels) for 15 minutes. Remove the pan (one for creating steam) from the oven the turn it down to 220°C/430°F and bake for a further 15 minutes or until the bread reach a minimum of 200°F 2nd attempt:
cinnamon sweet bread braid. To pretty to eat
Tho I have been cooking for decades, it was a first attempt at baking a bread, inspired by all the reading on artisanal breads. I like the idea of wholewheat--atta in India-- , and made sourdough using it. For the bread, I used two volumes of atta and one of all purpose flour, two volumes of water, and one volume of sourdough. I dont have a regular oven, so I used the "gas tandoor"that I use succesfully to bake cakes. My whole wheat cakes-- with no other flour adulterating them-- generally never fail me. But for the bread...hm.. I had to try all kinds of tricks, like using a lid of something to pour water and create steam, flipping the bread upside down to give the top crust some kind of a finish..and had to go with my nose(the fragrance of sourdough all over the house!!) and my fingers(tapping it for the hollow sound) ! Take a look...
Ian's techniques with my antics.It's been ages since I last tried potato in bread. But since Ian always puts it into his bread, I was inspired to make a potato bread this time. I boiled it until very tender then mashed it including the skin like what he does. Saves trouble from peeling and has added benefits too.I found some cheap cream cheese the other day so I immediately grabbed it. I have also been wanting to try cream cheese in bread (because Ian raves about the texture and moistness it gives to breads) for a long time but I can't because it is so expensive here. The flavor has has zero difference with the expensive brand that I know! I think l see a repeat with my breads and more cheesecakes down the road.This is again an uncharted territory for me so a lot of mishaps for this bread but it still turned out very good. First, I forgot to take into account the water of the potato and the cream cheese. It was like kneading soup, I had to rescue it with the addition of a lot of flour throwing my "mental ratios" way way off. By the end, I managed to come up with a dough and kneaded it until some sort of a windowpane.After a one hour ferment, I found the dough lacking strength and spreading too much so I gave it a stretch and fold; the improvement in strength was very obvious. I gave it another 2 sets of S&F's, one hour apart. Bulk fermentation took 4 hours at 34°C. What started as soup ended up as a very strong and silky dough. My starter was also pretty strong, the dough doubles after each S&F.I divided them into 4 and shaped them into boules. Because of so much activity of the dough, I refrigerated it immediately otherwise it will overproof. I think I am gaining experience of how to read the dough. The next day I cooked them using the "guo kui" method.Then there's another problem; because of the added flour, I ended up with more dough that my pot can handle. The dough was proofed right but were very bubbly, delicate, and sticky. At the skillet, they expanded unexpectedly huge and almost stuck to each other, very difficult to deal with. Now I know why guo kui has a very low hydration. I made a decision to bake only 3 of them and keep the last one that is on the brink of overproofing in the freezer. They continued expanding in the clay pot and stuck to each other and the pebbles, I had to pry them from things they touch that's why they have this mangled appearance but I find them beautifully rustic. Baking time took 30 minutes for each batch. The last one I baked was not affected negatively and we think it is the prettiest.Flavor is wonderfully tangy with a buttery cream cheese and potato aroma. It was quite neutral for sweet or savory combos. We ate it with peanut butter and I think it is a nice base dough for filled buns. It was a combination of a crispy caramelized crust and a very soft moist crumb. Heavenly! It is our favorite bread to date. My past enriched breads were soft but this one is just on a whole other level of softness and moistness. I don't know if it was the potato or cream cheese or both who was/were responsible for that. Ian was so right about the texture! Thanks to all bakers who experimented with cream cheese in dough but biggest thanks to Ian for always bringing it to light!
Hi Everyone, I thought, I share what Trevor is posting on IG on 'Pioneer SD' bread...considering the thoughts we had here on 'open' crumb or not etc.  I find this inspiring stuff and there is a bread for everyone somewhere and they are all beautiful , I think.... https://www.instagram.com/trevorjaywilson/?hl=en https://www.instagram.com/p/BgHRMahFs72/?hl=en&taken-by=trevorjaywilson https://www.instagram.com/p/BgHpruLAQFl/?hl=en&taken-by=trevorjaywilson Kat
Well, this is my sixth attempt at making a more open crumb per Trevor's book. I'm not getting the wide open crumb Trevor does, but I'm enjoying some mighty good breads along the way. This is this weekend's bake.. first the pictures. This loaf was made with 100g of 100% hydration AP flour starter at peak, 200g water, 285g flour (70% bread flour, 30% whole wheat) and 6g fine sea salt. I gave the flour an hour autolyse before adding the starter and salt. I gave the dough three sets of stretch and folds thirty minutes apart. Aside from the initial mixing of the starter into the flour/water, the three stretch and folds sets were each four simple quarter turn of the bowl stretch and folds. I tried to build structure but keep it gentle. From adding the starter I let it bulk for a total of almost seven hours to get it to a double of the dough.  I then tried to pour the dough onto the bench as gently as possible, but it deflated somewhat. I gave it a simple and gentle pre-shape and let it rest for ten minutes. I then shaped and loaded it into a basket. But I could also tell that the shaping process deflated the dough as well. I think next time I'm going to dramatically reduce bulk and leave most of the expansion to happen in the basket to reduce touching the dough after most of it's rise. Let's see if that helps. I loaded it in the the fridge for about 10 hours before the bake this morning. Here's the crumb.. The crumb is gently moist, has good body to it and great mouth feel. It's a very nice bread.. I'm getting there.. Bake happy.. bread1965!
Making sprouted flour is something that I have been curious about so I slightly adapted one of Dab’s recipes from last summer. And since I used Trevor’s pre-mix method earlier this week and had good success with it, I decided at the last minute to use the same method for this bread. That wasn’t my original plan since I was going to use part yeast water, dump everything together except for the salt and the levain, let sit while the levain did its thing and then mix in the last two ingredients. I had to give up the yeast water since I wasn’t sure what would happen having it sit overnight and then adding the levain and the add-ins. The yeast water will have to wait for another time. Makes 3 loaves 29 g each of Kamut, Spelt, Rye, Red Fife and Selkirk wheat berries (to be sprouted and milled into flour) 26 g each of Kamut, Spelt, Rye, Red Fife and Selkirk wheat berries (to be sprouted and used whole) 957 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax seeds 100 g dried cranberries 100 g shelled pistachios 30 g yogurt 735 g filtered water 22 g salt 305 g of 100% hydration levain (method is included in recipe) I got pretty decent oven spring considering all the add-ins in these loaves. They sure smell heavenly! Crumb shot when we cut one open.
Having been baking for 2 months and several mediocre baguette attempts, I've finally executed a sub-par baguette with an A+ recipe - SJSD baguettes from dmsnyder. The recipe is great. A nice blend of WW and all purpose (I didn't have the rye on hand to use but will next time). I recently purchased a baguette pan from a baking store that has three wells with many holes to cook baguettes on. What I found was that the three I baked on the pan did not brown on the bottom but the remaining one baguette that I baked on a sheet was slightly browned on the bottom. I was impressed with the forty-five degree scores. I would, however, like to have them open up more like dmsynder's did. The crust was great, though. I steamed with a preheated cast iron and boiling water for the first ten minutes. I believe there is a size issue here. While these are good length, they are fairly skinny and haven't beefed up like dmsynder's have. What can I do to make sure these not only rise but expand out and bulk up? Did I not proof them long enough? I also have splitting at my seam underneath which makes me think it may have under-proved as well.
I made KAF's March baking along recipe - Gruyere stuffed mini loaves. https://www.kingarthurflour.com/recipes/gruyere-stuffed-crusty-loaves-recipe While they may not look like much in this pic, these turned out to be an awesome cheese-filled volcano. I divided the dough into 4 per the "mini loaf" sizes but they were much too big for one person so we cut them in half. Also, instead of the starter they prescribed with dry active yeast overnight, I used equal weight sourdough starter (although I'm sure my hydration wasn't equal). I also did half Gruyere and half Pecarino Romano. I didn't have pizza seasoning on hand so I made my own - equal parts dried basil, dried oregano, and dried thyme. Perfect flavors and perfect cheesiness. I would say that in order to better hold the shape, I would roll my dough log tighter before cutting them. A skewer may even help to hold the tight coil while it bakes. I also thought mine could have risen more in the oven, it was a touch dense in the end. I may choose to proof it longer next time. I would almost say that 10 oz of cheese is a bit too much. While I never imagined saying that, it may be true in this case. I'll try 8 oz next time. A blend of parmesan and asiago may be nice to try as well.
Hi All, A brief post to share today's bake, a SD multigrain loaf (and a BIG one at that) with a bit of spice to it, plus olives and roasted red peppers. Flours and grains combined AP and BF, whole rye flour, barley flakes, and wheat germ, plus add-ins including multicolor quinoa (cooked), stuffed green olives and roasted red peppers (and the olive oil they were cooked with). I used Old Bay Seasoning (at 2.5%) for the salt and extra spices. This may have been the largest loaf I've made - dough weight >2K. My cloche dome wouldn't have possibly covered it, so I fashioned a cover from aluminum foil - worked just fine. Baked 20 minutes covered @450 F, then 40 minutes uncovered @425 F. I'm very pleased with the result - the crumb is soft and open, the crust is thin, but has some chewiness to it, and the flavor is well-rounded and savory. If I try this one again, I'll probably scale it back a bit, or divide the dough into smaller loaves. Happy baking, Everyone!
I have been quite busy lately, but haven't stopped baking. By the way, is it my impression or the number of posts has increased significantly lately? I can't keep up with so much information anymore. Baked two loaves this weekend, a record batch for me. Both 75% hydration and 20% levain. Some mixed cold bulk fermentation and cold proofing. Top loaf was 25% dark rye + 5% red fife, while the lower loaf 20% dark rye. The lower loaf was given as gift, so no crumb shot. The pic below is for the crumb shot of the top loaf along with my lunch yesterday. peter
the loaf detail crust detail crust - cracks crumb detail crumb center detail crumb rim Here is the original! I worked along the original formula as near as possible. But some little deviations had to be done. First of all, as I always do, with 500 g total flour. I have no white seed-starter, so I used my rye starter @ 100%, and, for longer ripening-time, only 20 g - 4 %. I have no durum berries for milling, so I used coarse durum flour, normaly for pasta making. This worked fine with other breads bevore. Instead of fresh milled WW I used a reminder coarse WW flour witch had a lot of bran in it. But now it is gone! ;-) I took 5 g fresh yeast - 1 %, as most time. During the first mixing after autolyse I had only a wet batter in my bowl, so I decided to add 20 g VWG - 4 %. After adding the seasalt the dough got strength, after adding the yogurt the strength got better, after the olive oil one more. Bulk for 1.5 h with s&f direct, and after 30 and 60 mn. Shaping was difficult, but here on TFL I read an articel, that helped me a lot! So I gave to the dough 3 x 2 "tour simple" during 30 mn. Then into the linned and well dusted banneton and for 7 h into the fridge at 4C/39F. Baking similar to here. Waited until next morning bevor slicing. This bread is gorgeous!Thank you, Ian! Fine but complex taste, crisp crust, deliciouse crumb, super for sandwiches. Next time I will try to mill my own Durum! Happy baking rudi
Yesterday was the last day to top up bread for the next week plus leave some in  the freezer for when we return. So Sunday overnight refreshed the starter, then Monday made 2 builds, converting it to 100% hydration and using bran for the 2nd build.  2nd & 3rd builds combined as we were going to be out until evening.  Before going to bed built the levains required for my bake. Hamelman"s 5 grain Levain (pictured) Soaker Flaxseed 62 g cracked rye 62 g sunflower seed 52 g Rolled oats 52 g salt 5 g Boiling water 276 g Levain Bread flour 169 g Water 211 g (yes 125% hydration) Mature starter seed 34 g Final Dough Hi gluten flour 338 g (I used bread flour + 11 g gluten to approximate 13.5% protein) Wholewheat flour 169 g Water 175 g Salt 12.2 g All the soaker All the levain Monday afternoon weighted out the seeds, gave the flaxseeds a quick grind in the coffee grinder so it was a mix of fine and coarse. I use jumbo rolled oats so gave them a quick chop the toasted all the grains and left to cool.  Amazing smell.  I haven't used toasted seed in this amount before. Monday night before bed mixed the levain and left on bench.  Mixed the soaker allowed to cool then covered it.  It soaked up all the liquid very quickly. Tuesday morning room temperature is 21 deg C.  Added water and soaker to the levain, mixed well then added to flour and salt mix. Mixed with stretch and folds until all incorporated.  It was pretty sticky and much firmer than I remember from the other occasions I have made  this. Left to rest for 10 minutes then did some for stretch and folds.  I added 2 tspn water (about 6 g) at this point as I felt it was a bit too firm. Left to rest. I did 3 more stretch and folds over next 3 hours then left to finish bulk ferment. This is after 2nd lot of stretch and folds. 2 hours later I divided the dough and preshaped, it had increased maybe 40%. I left it for 45 minutes but it didn't relax hugely, but was easy to shape into 2 batards. Turned the oven on to preheat DOs. This time I bench proofed and about an hour or so later it was looking poofy so popped them into the oven 15 mins lid on at 250 deg and then 20 minutes lid off.  I kept the convection on during this bake to keep oven temperature up and it seemed to help. Here is the 2nd batard.  After my recent experiences with Tartine style Country Champlain the shaping, scoring etc was a breeze. and of course, the crumb shot. Very happy camper! At the same time I made 3 small (300 g) 1:2:3 sourdough boules.   I found this was a very firm dough as well, much more so than normal.  I have opened a new bag of gluten flour (from a different source) and I really wonder  if that is influencing things so much.  I am adjusting my 11% protein flour to 12.5% but previous bakes have been much wetter. These had 4 x 10 stretch and folds, 2 hour BF followed by 20 mins preshape  with about a 2 -3  hour proof. No crumb shot, these were frozen as is. The final part of the bake was Trevor Wilson's Champlain.  I will post details on  "Anyone interested in a Champlain SD bake?" shortly. The day went well, it was busy and I was on a schedule to get it all baked before I went out to a 7 pm meeting.  lol, hubby had to take the final 1:2:3 loaf which was the final one, out for me.   I am happy with the crumb from the 5 grain levain as this has such a lot of grain, but I think it is the best I have baked this bread! Leslie
Earlier this month, Joze (joc1954) posted his Barley-Rye Bread, a lovely dense nutty boule.  Having a bag of barley on hand but never using it before, I decided to give it a go.  But, as with my usual linear uncircular bread self, as baguettes. According to Joze's write-up the dough takes no autolyse, has a long bench rise for a warm kitchen (3 1/2 hours) and a long retard (20 hours).  At 75% hydration this dough is quite dense and was difficult to French Fold without the flours soaking in an autolyse for at least 30-60 minutes or more.  Letter Folds every 45 minutes.  The dough remained stiff and fought being stretched and eventually shaped at every moment of its existence.  Neither extensible nor elastic, it just was... Halfway through the bulk retard I shaped and placed it on a couche, still dense and stiff, but workable and required only the slightest amount of flour on the bench and couche.  Back into retard and baked about 21 hours after it first entered he refrigerator.  Scoring was simple.  450dF, 13 minutes with steam, and another 13 minutes after rotating, with a final 2 minutes venting. And like Forrest Gump's box of chocolates, I didn't know what I'd get, how the bake would turn out, how much grigne or how open the crumb would be.  Oven spring was somewhat minimal but with a fine grigne and the crumb remained particularly dense.  I'll say that was due to having to be manipulated with heavy hands in order to pre-shape and shape the dough - a lot more so rather than to simply ball the dough up for a boule.  A lot denser than Joze's boule. A very "wheaty" taste, a bit addictive in fact.  40% bread flour, 30% rye, 30% barley.  75% hydration with 10% pre-fermented rye flour in 100% hydration levain.  I would have preferred a darker bake, but for a first foray in the barley-rye playpen, I remained on the cautious side of the playground. 4x300g baguettes/long batards
On my quest to get better at batards, I baked FWSY's white 80% biga recipe and subbed 20% of the flour with WW. I'm finally getting some good scoring. I think my razor blade is too dull, I have to go back a second time through to get a decent score. I also think part of my issue with batards falling flat as soon as I get them in the oven has been to do with my proofing baskets. I think my batard bannetons are actually pretty small? (https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B006J7KBPW/ref=oh_aui_detailpage_o02_s00?ie=UTF8&psc=1) When I've tried a whole 500g dough (half of a FWSY recipe), it almost seems like it's too much dough for the basket. Anyway, I've quartered the recipe so this is half the amount of called dough per loaf. Baked at 460 (per David's suggest when using a stone instead of DO with FWSY) for 15 minutes covered and 20 uncovered.
Oat porridge sourdough has become one of my favourite breads. This is a variation on the oat porridge bread in Chad Robertson's "Tartine 3". I was intrigued by Robertson's addition of almonds and almond oil to complement the texture and flavour of the oat porridge and have been using the basic oat porridge bread recipe to explore other additions. I milled and sifted 50 g organic spelt, 50 g organic rye and 200 g Marquis wheat (the bran was set aside for coating the loaves); this was mixed with 750 g organic all purpose flour, 775 g water and autolysed for 2 hours at room temperature.  Then I added 20 g sea salt (usually I use 22 g but there is some salt in the addition so I thought it best to cut back a little), 220 g very active young levain (4 hours) and started the bulk fermentation. I did a series of gentle stretch and folds every 30 minutes for the first two hours with an addition after the second series of folds of 250 g oat porridge, 100 g finely ground salted cashews and 75 g finely ground toasted sesame seeds (not quite a paste but close) and 100 g golden and brown flax seeds soaked with 140 g boiling water for 2 hours.  After 4 hours the dough was pre-shaped and rested for 1/2 hour then final shaping and into linen lined baskets seam side down (tinkering with the look of the finished loaf, with/without slashing, seam up/seam down) and dusted with bran and rice flour/flour mix.  I cold proofed the loaves overnight in the fridge for 10 hours and baked them direct from the fridge the next day; covered for 22 minutes at 500 F; 10 minutes at 450 F and then uncovered and finished directly on the baking stone for 25 minutes at 450 F.  I like this bread, a lot.... .
Leslie made some fantastic loaves with this recipe and since it was something that I had seen a number of people try and produce amazing loaves, I decided to give it a shot. Of course, I had to go and change the way the dough was put together. 🙄 I went ahead and used Trevor’s premix method but when it came to mix the soaker with the water and flour for the main dough, I realized that this was not going to work because a lot of the hydration came from the levain, and with the pre-mix method, the levain doesn’t go in till the next morning. So at first, I thought, no biggie, I will just steal some water from the levain and it will be all good. Well, uh! No! If I stole enough water from the levain to be able to mix the soaker with the flour, I was left with only 46 g of water to hydrate the 225 g of flour. So that wasn’t going to work. I was going to need to add a lot more water to the whole recipe. So I went with 70% hydration for the dough flour (the soaker had sucked up all of the water and didn’t look like it was about to give any back, it was that firm) and 80% hydration for the levain which came out to 13% more hydration than what Leslie posted in her recipe without the extra bits she added while making her dough. I crossed my fingers and hoped I didn’t end up with soup when I mix the levain in with the main dough in the morning. I also did one more change and that was to use the wholewheat flour in the levain instead of the a/p flour it called for. I wanted the bran to be softened by the acid in the levain. So the pre-mixed dough was all a/p flour. Our Canadian flour is ~13% protein (if you can believe the company’s claims) so I didn’t use any vital wheat gluten or high gluten flour. And the last thing to note is that I scaled this for 3 boules of about 750 g. Here is what I did: Soaker: 80 g rye chops 80 g flax seed 70 g sunflower seeds 70 g oat groats 7 g sea salt 367 g boiling water Main dough: 665 g unbleached flour 16 salt 465 g water Levain: 46 g starter 180 g water 225 g Selkirk wheat Well the results were very little oven spring. I wonder if I should have added that vwg after all. I also wonder if the gluten in the Levain  degraded during the overnight rise. It did feel sort of very loose when I used it. Hopefully, the taste makes up for the appearance. I need to make this again but following Leslie’s procedure this time.
Onions and rye go together like hot fudge and ice cream.  I haven't made a good rye bread in a while so today's bake was all about creating a flavorful onion rye with a moist open crumb.  I wanted to use my new Yeast Water in this bake but didn't want to only rely on it to leaven the bread so I mixed up a simple AP starter with some spelt bran and added the YW as part of the liquid in the main dough. The porridge was a combo of rolled oats and rye chops (chopped rye berries) and milk to add some extra creaminess. I milled the rye flour using my MockMill 200 and sifted out the germ and bran.  I tried something different this time and added about 55 grams of the germ/bran to some of the water from the main dough and let it soften at the same time as the main dough flours were autolysing with the YW and water.  Usually I add it to the main dough after mixing for about 5 minutes.  I'm not sure if this really made a difference, but the combination of the YW and high hydration really gave me a moist and open crumb which tastes amazing (if I do say so myself !). Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Caramelized Onions Cut onion into thin rings and cook on low heat in a saute pan with some olive oil for around 30-45 minutes until the onions are nice and brown and full of sweetness.  I added a little balsamic vinegar at the end to make them even sweeter. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, Yeast Water and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  Now add the caramelized onions and mix on low for another minute until they are incorporated.    Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 hour.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 520 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I started building a starter for a weekend bake over the past few days, but on Friday morning got a bit ahead of myself and created a bigger amount of starter than I normally do.. I find feeding 1:4:4 works for my kitchen temp and starter strength when I'm feeding every 12 hours.. but then I came home late Friday night to this.. It was about 500+ grams of starter that by this stage had more than trippled.. I guess on the one hand I should be happy to have a virbrant and active starter! So I decided to put it to good use but didn't have a formal plan. So I added 800g of unbleached bread flour, 200g of whole wheat flour, 720g of water (autolysed for about an hour), 200g of starter, 20g of fine sea salt. I mixed this well and then thirty minutes later I added 100g of hemp hearts, 100g of brown flax seeds, 100g of oat bran (all three were toasted), 25g of chia seeds and 50g of amber honey. I gave it all a good mix and did so again thirty minutes later. But it was already late and the night's scotch was starting to make me sleepy! I decided to leave it on the counter for the night given the amount of additions.. it looked like this.. By the next morning I woke up to this.. It looked good and obviously rose well. But had little structure as I didn't give it much by way of stretch and folds.  I thought of it as a no-knead experiment.. I poured it  out on my bench and it  deflated a fair amount in the process despite my best gentle efforts. I pre-shaped and then shaped it into a few loaves to proof in baskets. I left them on the counter for almost four hours and they probably rose around 75% or so.. i always find it hard to know for sure.. Loading the proofed loaf into the combo cooker.. as I put it in the basket seam side down I didn't score the loaf.. (probably should have just the same).. Here they are out of the oven.. Here's the crumb shot.. The aroma while they baked was earthy and great. The crumb is dense but not overly wet or under-cooked. It's just not open and is heavy.  It's very tasty, good and better toasted, but not ideal. So my question is to ask: is this more about too much additives by weight of dough, or process? Can you make a more open/lighter crumb with this much in additions or did I cross the limit and added too much? Or was this about process, and by not creating structure with stretch and folds and making this an overnight no-knead that the outcome was inevitable? Thanks in advance.. bread1965!
the loaf crumb detail crust - cracks detail crumb - rim detail crumb - butterfly I was searching for recipes, containing potatoes. And among others I found the 'Pane Montanaro' from dmsnyder. I adapted it for my wants and did different attempts, this one is No 4. My overall formula : The day before baking : cook ca. 120 g of unpeeled potatoes (I: with steam) for 30 mn, peel, and let cool down to warm, not hot. Potatoe - Rye - Levain: press / crush potatoes with a fork for mixing, do not use a machine! 24-26C / 75-79F for 15-24 h Biga : 12-14C / 53-7 F for 14-12 h Hot soaker : bring to the boil, simmer for 20 mn, cool down, cover and put into fridge. For use sift and take the berries only. Baking day: Particial Autolyse : mix and let rest for 1 h. Final dough: mix up to the point, where all these ingredients are integrated into a row dough, then add knead on low speed up to nearly full developement of gluten, then add knead on low speed until the berries are fully integrated in the dough. bulk-f : 1.5 h s&f : every 30 mn shape : boule placed with seam-side up in a linned banneton, well dusted with rice-flour to the linnen side and wheat-flour to the loaf-side. For isolation in a sealed plastic-bag. final-f : in the fridge at 4-5 C / 39-41 F for 5-6 h baking : preheat the oven with pressureless steam until the oven-temp ist near 98C/210F, then scare as used and load into the oven seam side down let cool on a rack. enjoy! happy baking rudi
I’m so excited that this forum affords me my own blog! What a unique and valuable perk! As I continue My self-guided tour of the baking and bread world, I sometimes become frustrated with the lingo of baking. Not because I don’t understand the words. I’m a linguist at heart, and sometimes (especially when I’m writing a recipe), I can look at my musings for hours, trying to decide which word is best. Dough rises. But do you raise it? Before you put the dough in the oven, do you proof it, or prove it (and on whom lays the burden of proof?). Can “proof” be used in any part of the fermentation cycle; is the dough proofing after every knead, during every rise? And then there are the various kneading cycles. Is one “mixing” the dough the first time round? And kneading” the second? And “punching down” the dough sounds artsy, but it’s no more descriptive than “punching down” the dough, which, according to the latest research, is a misnomer; punching does nothing for dough, or relationships, or walls, and might be harmful to either of the three. Last linguistic beef with baking terms. Or maybe I’m just being a whining liberal. I think we need a new term for prolonged fermentation in the fridge. These days, retarded fermentation just sounds, well, insulting. Wouldn’t “delayed fermentation,l “interrupted fermentation,” or “super-duper long fermentation” work equally well without casting aspersions on people with disabilities? Okay, maybe I’m just too sensitive to social issues. I promised a recipe in title. This is not a bread recipe, but with a little tweaking, you could turn it into a pizza topping, so I feel vindicated in posting it. When I was about sixteen, my family went on a road trip across America, our last great vacation together as a family. We stopped in the Big Easy for a few nights, and Dad treated us to dinner at a very posh restaurant with a long NOLA tradition. The seating was dark red velvet, the wait staff were dressed in formal clothes, and the restaurant was so dark that the waiter had to bring a flashlight so he could read the check. Then the waiter had to bring an AED. I ordered the BBQ shrimp, and I was gonna xpecting a couple of skewers of shrimp cooked on a grill. What I got was a steaming platter of heads-on shrimp doused in a sauce that was nearly black with pepper. A finger bowl was served alongside. I thought it was a dipping sauce to cut the peppery heat of the shrimp, and hilarity ensued. The bowl did have a lemon in it! I didn’t know how to cook at the time, so I didn’t really pay attention to the tastes, and I’ve never been able to duplicate that dish. But the following recipe is quite close. I love New Orleans. The music, the architecture, the lore, and the art are unequaled almost any where in America. Did I forget something? Oh yeah, the food! Whenever I get the chance to visit New Orleans, I’m planning my menu before I get to the airport! I love seafood, literally. And there’s no better place for it than NOLA! So here’s my version of a classic Cajun/ Creole dish. BBQ shrimp never sees a grill. The BBQ is in reference to the  sauce that the shrimp are cooked in. There are enough recipes for NOLA BBQ shrimp to fill volumes! If you ask ten people in the Big Easy for their recipe, you’ll get eleven answers. Or maybe fifteen! My rationale for sharing this recipe in a baking forum is that it can be deconstructed and made into a pizza. CAJUN BBQ SHRIMP Sorry I have no pics of this dish. I usually photograph all my food, but slipped up this time. Preheat the oven to 300°F Melt the butter over medium heat in a large cast iron skillet. After the butter has stopped foaming, add the opinion and cook till soft and translucent, 5 to 8 minutes. Add the spices and stir until fragrant, 30 seconds to 1minute. Add the garlic and do the same, about 30 seconds. Do not let the garlic brown. Add the Worcestershire sauce and about half the bottle beer, stir and bring to a simmer. Simmer until reduced by 1/4, and remove the heat. Allow to cool for 5 to 10 minutes. Position the shrimp in a single layer in the sauce, then turn them to coat. Sprinkle the shrimp with black pepper and top with the lemon slices. Place the skillet in the oven. After 5 minutes, turn the shrimp using tongs or a spatula. Cook for 5 to 10 minutes longer, until till the shrimp are pink and the flesh is just turning opaque. Serve over rice or with warm, crusty French or Italian bread. Don’t forget to suck on the shrimp heads, that’s the best part! If you’d like to turn this into a pizza topping, after the shrimp has cooked, strain the sauce and peel the shrimp. Add two tablespoons of sauce back in the skillet, and add two tablespoons flour, stirring constantly until the the roux is thick and your spoon leaves a trail. Add the rest of the sauce and cook, stirring, until thick. Use the sauce for the pizza and top it with the shrimp. Laissez les bon temps rouler!
My starter has stopped doubling in size. I usually feed  50g if starter with 80g strong flour, 20g wholemeal and 100g of water. Any recommendations? Should I go back to 50g starter, 50 strong flour, 50g water. Second question if I used rye flour to feed my starter what would the impact be to both my bread and starter? Thanks
Another in Abel's ongoing postings of embarrassingly wonderful bakes:  His Ziggy stoneground loaf from mid-January caught my fancy, and I was sure that when the time was appropriate, I'd try my hand at his scoring technique here.  Well, the time is appropriate.  With neighbors coming over for some wine, bread and cheese this afternoon, I figured, why not now? This is my version of the Hamelman 125% liquid levain hydration semolina loaf.  I use a rye levain instead and apply a boatload of sesame seeds in the way that I learned from David Snyder's post from oh, so long ago.  Baguettes were scored with my curved razor lame.  Ziggy was scored with my ceramic knife - another new tool for my baking toolbox, and another new scoring technique for my baking pleasure. 25% Bread Flour, 60% Durum, and 15% Rye (all in the levain).  At an overall hydration of 67%, this bread is a little hard to French Fold after a 20 minute "autolyse" with the levain included, fighting me along the way. Once the bulk rise begins, it become very manageable and extensible.  Two hours with folds at 40, 80 & 100 minutes in my warmer than most kitchen.  Then the standard routine, overnight nap in the refrigerator, divide and shape in the morning, couched and then shoved back in to retard for a few hours more.  Probably in the vicinity of about 15 hours total retard. I dunno, didn't pay too much attention to that small detail. 460dF oven for 13 minutes with mega steam, and then rotate and 13 minutes more with 2 minutes of venting. I likely scored Ziggy a little deep, but really can't complain about the eye-candy effect of it at all. 1x700g batard, 2x400g long batards/baguettes alan
It's been a while since I've been here, but not since I've made bread. I've got a pumpernickel on the counter, a sourdough slow fermenting in the fridge, and a soaker/biga combo for a whole wheat sesame sandwich loaf I'll make tomorrow. With nothing to do I'm considering making a partial whole wheat hokkaido milk roll... In any case, I'm realizing that I'm just not the sort of person to faithfully keep a baking log. But perhaps I can give an impressionistic account of the current state of my bread baking journey. My last post concluded "getting comfortable with commercial yeast and ultimately returning to sourdough." Since then I've been going through a lot of commercial yeast! My favorite loaf has to be Peter Reinhart's "oat broom" bread which I make with 4 oz. of roasted sesame seeds mixed in. I was making some great loaves in my pullman pan, but the last couple haven't been as lofty. I had been using a bag of Robin Hood whole wheat I picked up in Canada over the holidays, but now I'm back on King Arthur. There may be something to this Canadian flour conspiracy theory. I've also been dipping my toes in tangzhong. Stella Park's bagel recipe once, and a few different hokkaido milk bread recipes. I've made this one a couple times, but I've got to scale down the recipe because it makes too much dough for me. That's what brings me here today... I'm thinking of branching out to whole wheat hokkaido milk roll (partly to use up this flour, partly because I've got nothing to do right now). But I'll leave that to another time. I've got too much going on today. Besides Hokkaido, there's been plenty of enriched white breads that often end up slathered with chocolate goo. The whole wheat hokkaido would let me have my cake and not feel guilty too. I haven't been doing as much sourdough... Louis's health hasn't been great, but inactivity hasn't helped any. So I'm working on that. Probably I just have to stop associating sourdough with "artisinal" boules and just start making levain sourdough so I can have a healthy throughput of flour running through him. In any event, that's what I've been up to lately.
just spent 30 min trying to lose amazon ad. Keeps popping up and won’t close. Anoying
A Johannesburg filling station keeps passing motorists entertained with its daily ration of aphorisms.  I think this one is worth repeating, even if it's not new!
I have been exploring the delicious world of porridge breads lately but today I decided to venture away from that...sort of.  When I first started baking bread, apart from the therapeutic value of the process, my motivation was primarily nutritional. I wanted to bake bread that tasted good and was good for me...of course how the bread looked, whether the ears were big enough, oven spring, open crumb etc., all those concerns also become apparent on the learning curve but in the end taste and nutrition seem to be what matters most.  Being sustained, being able to eat the less-than-perfect-not-what -was-expected results of our baking experiments has been an often stated encouragement from other bakers. We have bread to eat, baked by our own hands...that's a pretty good thing.  So my focus for today's bake was first and foremost about nutrition and taste. I have a palate preconception where bread is concerned - maybe it's because I grew up in Saskatchewan, all that prairie grain creating a taste preference in my DNA - but I like bread that tastes like the grain used to make it, nutty, grassy, mellow, the flavour of a nicely caramelized crust.  But I digress...that is my underlying bread bias but not an all or nothing preference. Today I baked a bread that I think tastes pretty good while also having a solid nutritional profile - the aesthetics may have suffered a bit with less oven spring, ears but I am quickly getting rid of the evidence with one loaf going to a neighbour and the other served up for lunch. As Danni often does, I am using pictures to share what I did for this bake... I used 250 g mix of fresh milled, sifted (bran kept for final coating) organic rye, hard spring wheat and 750 g all purpose organic flour with 800 g water (this was a little too much water, I think 750 g would have been best) left for 1 hour at room temperature; then 220 g young levain (4 hours) and 20 g sea salt was mixed in to start the bulk fermentation. Four series of stretch and folds every half hour for the first two hours then two hours resting. After the second series of stretch and folds, 1 hour into the bulk fermentation: Two additions after the second series of stretch and folds: The first one - ground up 50 g toasted sesame seeds, 100 g hemp hearts and mixed into a paste with 150 boiling water. The second - 50 g chia, 50 g golden/brown flax, 50 g toasted hemp seeds (not hearts) mixed with 250 g boiling water and left for 2 hours.  I recall one of Joze's posts where he was experimenting with hemp flour and sesame; the complimentary flavours worked well in his bread so I thought adding ground hemp hearts and sesame would provide  a nutritional component as well as a nice subtle flavour. The toasted hemp seeds were added for their texture and nutritional value as were the flax seeds. After the final set of stretch and folds, two hours... After 4 hours, pre-shaped and left to rest for thirty minutes: I began with a generous dough hydration characteristic of the Tartine style breads I have been trying to bake but without thought to the affect of the additions on the final dough hydration. Robertson's advice for porridge breads is to cut back his typical 85% hydration to 75% to account for the porridge water. In my mind I was not making a porridge bread so autopilot was engaged and before I had thought it through I had a nice 80% hydration dough to start with...I am not sure the exact final dough hydration but by the feel of the dough at the end of the bulk fermentation (I think the soaker may have released some of it's water into the dough too) it was probably 90%+  It was a bit more challenging handling/shaping the dough. Final shaping and into linen lined proofing baskets: I was able to gently wrestle and shape the dough into a batard and a boule (you may notice most of my posts have a boule and a batard - it's because I have one Lodge enamelled pot and one oval Creuset).  The loaves were dusted with the bran sifted and saved at the start and some rice flour/flour.  This bake was also different because the plan came to me early in the day and I decided to forego my preferred overnight cold -proof, doing the whole thing during my day off.  Again, always amazing to me how easy it is to slip into autopilot mode - I am so used to final shaping, into baskets and then leaving the loaves overnight in the fridge for 10 hours - I left these loaves to proof in plastic bags at room temperature on the kitchen island and forgot about them!  Fortunately I eventually remembered what I was doing before they were too over-proofed - I think they would have been better if baked an hour earlier but it is what it is. Baked in pots, covered at 500 F for 25 minutes; 450 F for 10 minutes and then uncovered and directly on the oven stone at 450 F for 25 minutes: The loaves were really floppy coming out of the proofing baskets, very challenging to score and transfer into the pre-heated pots before they spread out too much.  I wasn't feeling very optimistic about the final outcome at this point but got them into the pots and into the oven hoping for the best.  There wasn't as much oven spring or development of ears as I like (I know, it's just aesthetics!) but the crust and colour looked pretty good coming out of the pots at the halfway point of the bake.  They took a little longer to finish, again probably because of the high hydration dough, but they finished up nicely I think. The crumb shot: Well, as I started with at the beginning of this post, this bake was supposed to be a change from my of late, usual porridge breads, but in the end, with the high hydration and wet pasty additions it's pretty much that again.  I am happy to say, despite being over-proofed, kind of floppy, over hydrated and a bit flat coming out of the oven...this bread tastes really good! The crumb is soft, chewy and gelatinous, the crust is crisp and nutty, the hemp hearts and sesame add a really nice subtle flavour just like Joze said and the toasted hemp seeds add a great, nutty crunch every now and then - a delicious learning experience for the next time I try this.
A couple more of my current favorite multi-grain sourdough breads. These were baked in cast iron Dutch ovens. Happy baking! David
With my brother and sister-in-law in town I baked a few semolina-fennel seed-golden raisin-toasted pine nut baguettes (that's a mouthful - in more ways than one) and then followed that up with a batch of Vermont SDs. On our way down to Miami for a fantastic dinner at Jamon Iberico Pata Negra restaurant, we stopped at the equally fantastic Laurenzo's Italian Supermarket, which I've mentioned here a few times.  Brother and wife had heard me talk Laurenzo's up and had to see it.  I packed up one of each of the baguettes to give to David, the owner.  I try to drop off a bread or 3 every time I stop in - this is the place where I get my buckets of semola rimacinata. Against my sincere protestations, David insists on me not walking away with my hands empty.  He has recently been getting his bread wholesale from the < year old Miami outpost of the Sullivan Street Bakery. The lineup here, parts of which have already been shorn off or disappeared completely are (from top to bottom):  Filone, Pugliese, Stirato, Ciabatta, and then my two (the semolina is already missing its right half).  The filone was gargantuan and the stirato was as long as a policeman's night stick before they were attacked in the name of peeling off some to add to what we gave to our dining out companions - my cousins. This is a little over the top... alan
I loved the taste of this bread so decided to make it the way it was originally written by Hamelman as much as possible (except for the addition of yogurt) since I am doing this by hand and he used a mixer. I also used some vital wheat gluten to replace his high gluten flour which I am guessing is around 15% protein. To do this, I found the niftiest online calculator. http://flourmath.bradfordrobertson.com Hamelman calls for wholewheat flour and I used sifted freshly milled Red Fife flour. The bran was used in feeding my starter to get it up to speed before making the final levain. Makes 3 loaves Liquid Levain build 272 g Bread flour 343 g Water 55 g Starter (liquid) Soaker 100 g Rye berries 100 g Flaxseeds 85 g Sunflower seeds 85 g Oat groats 484 g Water, boiling 6 g Salt Dough 533 g Unbleached flour 15 g Vital Wheat Gluten 274 g Sifted freshly milled Red Fife flour 303 g Water 30 g yogurt 21 g Salt All of the Soaker 650 g Levain A couple of days before The night before making the dough Final mix and bake They came out of the oven looking very nice!
This is my second attempt at a similar bread.  I wanted to use my new Apple/Orange Yeast Water to make a Levain for this bread and not use any other sour dough levain.  When I did this a few weeks ago I didn't let the levain ripen long enough and the dough didn't develop correctly.  This time I let the levain go for a good 12 hours and then refrigerated and used it the next day.  No problem this time with developing the dough correctly. I used some fresh milled and sifted Durum flour along with KAF bread flour and Caputo 00 flour.  For some extra crumb softness I added Greek yogurt and olive oil as well.  The sifted out germ and bran from the Durum flour was soaked in some of the water for the dough and added back in the final mix. All in all I was happy with how this one came out.  I was surprised the crumb wasn't a little more open but it tastes great and made some excellent grilled bread brushed with some olive oil and topped with some sharp aged cheddar cheese. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 12 hours or until the starter is nice and bubbly.  I put it in the refrigerator overnight and used it the next day. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours , yogurt and water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 1 hour.  Next add the salt, starter, and olive oil and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 520 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
that are perfectly ripe.  Made a tomato, fresh basil, cracked black pepper, tangerine balsamic vinegar, manzanilla olive oil, mini fresh mozzarella ball and parmesan cheese salad.
after seeing some lovely cut/stencilling by ana a.negra, I decided to try it myself.  I've always wanted to make sea weed bread, so I thought I'd do the two together. I live near the coast where dulce seaweed is harvested, so I swapped some bread for fresh seaweed from the local cockle man.  The seaweed took two days to dry in my oven, then I blitzed it into flakes.  I've made a low hydration dough here as I thought the cutting will be easier, which it was. 20% Canadian white 65% bacheldre a local flour 12% protein 5% light rye 10% wholemeal spelt 20% levan 1.5 tablespoons seaweed, 1 tablespoon grated lemon zest 72% whey left over from yogurt makimg 2.5% salt the crumb looks tight, but it's very tasty with a crackly crumb.  The lemon is coming through, but the seaweed is very mild, dulce is very mild though, so perhaps I could use a different type next time, or add more than the 1.5 tablespoons.  The dulce made the dough a lovely rose colour.
How about the Anglo-Italian fusion for Easter: a combination of hot cross buns and panettone? Yes, I know, there's the properly Italian colomba di pasqua and I've made it too, but my bunettones are just a bit of fun. I used a sourdough starter but didn't go through the faff of lievito madre, getting up at four in the morning etc., like I did back at Christmas time. Not orthodox, but ordinary, lively 100% wheat sour starter seemed to work well. I made 11 mini ones and one large - like the 11 disciples plus Jesus symbolised by marzipan balls atop English Simnel cake... except I ran out of mini panettoncino cases and used an odd collection of paper cases and ramekins. Ah well, disciples weren't all the same were they? And yes, the picture features just the select few! The detailed recipe and instructions are here on my blog site and all comments welcome. Purists - please don't shoot me.
I saw someone post a Granola Sourdough which looked pretty good so I threw 60 grams of granola into my standard recipe to see how it would come out. I was pretty impressed as the granola added a good subtle flavor and texture which I really liked.... I will be experimenting more with this soon. 450 grams strong white bread flour 50 grams wholewheat 100 grams starter 10 grams salt 60 grams granola 325 grams water
Majority of the heavy work and projects for the mid of the semester were done, I just have to compile them in a portfolio so now I can relax and prepare for exams and do some heavier baking/cooking. Still, I can't function well during hectic times without making bread so for a forced "bake", I made a simple bread: steamed buns; can be cooked indoors in under 20 minutes. I made this about 2 weeks ago when our professors were mad giving projects after projects, just before going to class.This is different from the normal mantou; aside from being sweeter, they were also lighter with a less bready texture and  instead of a smooth top, it is cracked that's why they're also called as smiling or laughing buns. It is really their appearance that make them pretty and eye-catching. It is consider huge smile is a hallmark of a well-made bun. This phenomenon is due to the use of a second (chemical) leavening agent. If you are a traditionalist, you would hunt down the elusive ammonium bicarbonate to make them "smile". But as much as I want to try the real thing, it's impossible to find it here. Well, I am always open to making changes for recipes to work out for me so I just substituted it with double acting baking powder and it worked fine. I think the key to smiling is in the technique in shaping the buns.The dough was made with AP and sourdough instead of yeast, water, white sugar, salt and baking powder with a little bit of canola oil. Bulk ferment took 6 hours then I rolled it into a tight cylinder then immediately to the fridge. Next day divide into 4 pieces by twisting and ripping each off the cylinder. Without any proofing, I steamed it over high heat for 20 minutes then you will see them smiling and laughing at you which a really proud moment.I think I should have made them smaller because the three of them were not able to support their own weight and collapsed and smiled at their sides which is not as stunning. Luckily, one was grinning.  Texture was light but with a slight cake-like denseness. I can't detect any tang probably offset by the sugar. Overall, very delicious even plain. I'm wondering if they will still smile if I fill them. They only way to find out is to make them. See you all on my next adventure. Thanks!
Time for Easter so that means a fruit bread is “de rigueur”. I tweaked and adapted a version that I made for Canadian Thanksgiving back in October. Makes 3 loaves Levain 148 g bread flour (I used a combo of spelt bran and sifted flour as well as bread flour) 118 g water 30 g starter Porridge 125 g large flake oats 25 g oat bran (combo of oat bran and spelt bran) 345 g water 75 g plain yogurt Main dough 633 g unbleached flour 17 g vital wheat gluten 302 g freshly milled and sifted spelt flour from 347 g Spelt berries 50 g freshly ground flax seeds 75 g dried cranberries 75 g candied mixed peel 75 g toasted sunflower seeds 50 g honey 300 g apple yeast water 250 g water 22 g sea salt 266 g levain A couple of days before: The night before: Porridge Levain Final Mix and Bake: And since we are having Easter dinner with family, I said I would be bringing dessert: Carrot cake and sticky buns. The carrot cake still needs to be iced but it’s a good start.
Having found the Polenta Pepita sourdough bread recipe on this site, I set about making the bread only to realize that the hubz had used the last of the Pepita seeds on his salad!And so the recipe "evolved" into a new one!Pepitas were replaced by pinenuts, and with the addition of two tablespoons of Pesto sauce what should have been a Mexican ingredients loaf, became an Italian ingredients loaf.Since the Pesto is quite high in sodium I reduced the salt to just 15g.The flavor and crumb are both great.The only other notes for this bake:  One loaf was baked in a cast iron Dutch Oven placed in a hot oven, and the other loaf was baked in a pre-heated Romertopf. The loaf in the foreground is the D.O. baked loaf..better oven spring!
When I first learned of genius entrepreneur Nathan Myhrvold's endeavor to create THE Ultimate Work on Bread Baking, pouring thousands of dollars in his state-of-the-art scientific laboratory plus baking station, I was rather skeptical. After Modernist Cuisine now molecular baking? But a presentation last summer at the Kneading Conference in Skowhegan/ME, with stunning photos of the process, was so convincing that I overcame my doubts (and qualms about spending so much money), and ordered my copy at Amazon. The massive metal box set (History and Fundamentals, Ingredients, Techniques and Equipment, Recipes I and II, and a spiral bound kitchen manual with formulas) arrived in November, too heavy for one person to carry. Totally awed by those gorgeous, atlas-sized tomes, I asked myself the obvious question: "Am I good enough for this Rolls Royce of baking books?" Being the anal Virgo, instead of undisciplined rushing at the recipes, I started reading the first volume, History and Fundamentals. Though I'm generally not a great fan of non-fiction, remembering with a shudder the all-night-cramming before my final medical exams, I found the book a very pleasant read, interesting, full of fascinating facts, and beautifully illustrated. My husband, a Vietnam veteran, travels to Asia every year, Singapore, Cambodia, and, always, Vietnam. Whether in Saigon or Danang, his favorite food are Banh Mi sandwiches, and he misses them here in Maine. The toppings, meat, pickles, cucumbers, chili and cilantro, are not hard to come by, but the Banh Mi breads are a totally different matter. Though French baguettes are their ancestors, Banh Mi rolls are different, with a thinner crust and softer, fluffier crumb. With Richard just back from Saigon, I decided on Banh Mi rolls, my first loaves to bake from Modernist Bread. I had tried to make them before, using the only recipe (from Andrea Nguyen) that appears to be circulating in the internet. It wasn't bad, but, according to my husband (and my own memory from my trip to Vietnam years ago), it wasn't right, either, no crackly crust, and too chewy. For many of Myhrvold's breads you can choose between two or (even three) different formulas, a classic version, a "best" version, and a "modernist" approach (with unusual enhancements, like gelatin). But for Banh Mi, there is only one recipe. Though I often tweak formulas according to my own preferences, this time I didn't not stray from the Modernist's path, awed by the expertise of the authors. I wondered a bit about the shortening (or lard) in the bread - no fat in French baguettes, and why would bakers in a poor Asian country add a costly enrichment to their dough? Instead repeating the mixing procedures and different steps for shaping, and proofing in every formula, Modernist Bread refers to detailed instructions in volume 3 (Techniques and Equipment). Fine. But would it have killed them (or taken up too much space) to put oven temperatures and baking times into the recipes? You had to look under "filone entry in French Lean Bread Baking Times and Temperatures", several pages back, to find them - or not, since there was no filone in the list! And why is cold bulk fermentation only very briefly and cursorily mentioned as an option? Instead, the Techniques section offered retardation of the shaped breads, along with fermentation at different room temperatures. Great, if you bake only one loaf - or have a walk-in refrigerator! I started my mixing process, following the Modernist Bread's instructions - and was confronted with my first question: "add salt and mix on medium-low speed to low gluten development; add melted shortening or lard, and mix on medium speed to full gluten development." How do I gauge low gluten development? I added the shortening after I mixed in the salt, drizzling it slowly into the mixer bowl. But, alas, my gluten development was faster, my dough did not welcome the greasy addition, resisting its incorporation, and, instead, swishing the liquid fat all around in the bowl. It took a long time of mixing, until the dough looked somewhat homogeneous - but it was still coated in grease! No help for that, I had to trust in the mitigating effect of long fermentation (I did the cold bulk), especially since my 7-qt Kitchen Aid, deciding, "enough is enough", switched itself off to avoid overheating. Everything else, shaping and proofing, went according to plan, until it was time to bake. Modernist Bread pooh-poohs every steaming measure we poor hobby bakers are able to employ, except for using a Dutch oven or a covered baker. Tough luck for home-based micro-bakeries like mine that need to process more than one loaf at a time! I guess I have to live with my guilt of using my modest, pebble filled steam pan. In the "French Lean Bread Baking Temperatures and Times" table I found only temperature for baking (470ºF/245ºC), not for preheating the oven. I remembered having come across it somewhere in the Technique volume, but couldn't find that paragraph again. Assuming 500ºF would be okay, I preheated my oven (which keeps the correct temperature), with baking stone and steaming device in place. According to the time table, the small baguettes should be baked for 15 minutes with steam, and 10 minutes without, at 470ºF. But when I checked after 15 minutes, to remove the steam pan, they were already fully baked, with an interior temperature of 211ºF. The baguettes looked okay from the outside, though the crust was not crackly. But when we cut the baguettes in halves to make sandwiches, we were in for a big disappointment. Instead of airy and fluffy, the crumb was dense and chewy. And worse - they didn't taste like Banh Mi at all, more like brioche (made with shortening instead of butter). We ate our sandwiches, grumbling, and I was sorely tempted to throw the remaining two loaves in the trash - something I hardly ever do with my bread, even if it's burnt, or otherwise malfatti. In the end the frugal housewife prevailed - I cut off the bread crusts and ground them into crumbs. And worked the loaves into a really nice bread pudding! Successfully recycled - Leek Bread Pudding, made of Banh Mi rolls.
This wood oven is in Aude, France. Anyone interested should consider to have it shipped by truck . It is mobile, but there about 2 1/2 tons to pull around . You will see in the video the step by step of its fabrication . So anyone can do this . I invested about 5,500 euros in it , and  will sell it for double in cash or trade. This wood oven could also heat an entire large home with very little adapting . Because it  has 300 kilos of insulation  , once hot , it stays hot, and consumes very little wood. https://www.facebook.com/johndlpayne/videos/10152461441466429/?l=529793928512228775 you can watch this without belonging to FB
I am finally settled and, with a lively rye starter bubbling away in the fridge, baking again. Happiness is... A simple sourdough enriched with 60 grams of butter and 100 grams of raw honey purchased from a farm nearby. I have dedicated it to the lovely little Blue Chequered Cuckoo Bees that love my big rosemary bush even more than I do.
Some weeks back I checked out Ken Forkish's "Flour Water Salt Yeast" ebook from the local library, and began lurking on these forums. I have learned a great deal about bread from all of your expertise here. I read the first part of the book and thought of trying his sourdough starter recipe, at vastly smaller portions. I think he suggests 500g each per feeding, which is crazy for a beginner--why on earth would you need so much when billions of these organisms can live in a teaspoon? Anyway, using more like 150g each of whole wheat flour and water, it started off smelling like rotted onions (the leuconostocs, as I later learned), settling down to a mild glue-like odor by the second week after switching to an all AP flour diet. But the bubbling activity was always weak, and tasted only sour--not yeasty at all. I suspect that I started twice-daily feedings too soon, and diluted the small yeast population to near extinction. After weeks it was going nowhere, so I made pancakes with the discard, and looked for another recipe. I was happy to find Debra Wink's pineapple juice solution, and especially appreciated the thorough explanation of biology and chemistry that came with it. This was a refreshing change from the popular notions about local yeast drifting in on the air and mysteriously finding a balance. She explained well how creating the acidic environment first could give the culture a head start. Her recipe only adds, not discarding, for the first few days, which makes a lot of sense. Not having pineapple juice, I used some expired frozen apple juice concentrate (having similar acidity). Two tablespoons each of juice and whole wheat flour; add two more each the next day, and the next. After that, discard all but approx. 1/4c, adding equal weights of AP four and filtered water. The smelly phase was neatly averted; I noticed a sour aroma and hooch formation after 3-4 days, and by 1 week it had a definite yeast taste, though still a kind of bland sour smell. There was a surprise around days 8-10, when it smelled exactly like fresh apples--this long after the apple juice has been diluted out. But the apple smell didn't last; shortly after, it took on a kind of fruity banana-like smell (with a hint of paint or glue), which it has had ever since. With few exceptions, I have fed my starter once a day. This has made for plenty of discards to turn into banana bread, waffles and pancakes, but still seems like a lot of diluting the colony. Since the first few days, I had never seen the telltale layer of hooch that means the starter is starving. Could I go two days without feeding? Longer? So I did an experiment--I started a child feeding in a separate jar, 25g starter + 25g each AP flour and water (total of 75g), and did not feed it for 10 days. I gave it an occasional stir, but that's it. I kept feeding my mother culture in the original jar once a day as always. My kitchen is around 65-70F most of the time. After 7 days, the unfed culture still bubbled away happily, rising about 50% between stirrings. No hooch, no sharp acetone smell--still the same fruity sweet-and-sour fragrance, and a tangy sour beer-like taste. Drawing off a spoonful of this aged mixture, I did a comparison of activity between it and my fed-daily mother culture. Child: 20g aged (7 day) starter, 20g water, 20g AP flour (small jar) Mother: 50g starter, 50g water, 50g AP flour (large jar) Both appeared to rise identically, each gaining around 75% volume in their respective vessels. Similar bubble action, similar fruity aromas and sour tangy taste. If an 8-day-old starter still bubbles up to a moderate rise, there must still be some food for the yeast and lactobacillus to eat. As long as they're not apparently starving, what's the advantage to dumping a trillion happy critters in the waffle iron? Why not let them multiply and become concentrated? So I'm thinking of skipping the daily feedings, and will simply let the colony mature. It wouldn't hurt to feed it once a week at least, but I can't seem to make enough waffles with the discards to justify daily feeding regimen, even with only a few spoonfuls a day. After 10 days without a feeding, stirring once or twice a day, the aged starter finally stopped rising, and had minimal bubbling. There was only about 2 tablespoons of it left, so I simply fed it (no discard) with equal weights of warm water and AP flour in the evening. The next morning, it had almost tripled in bulk, filling a 1-pint jar to the brim (but luckily not overflowing). This is the best rise I've ever seen from the culture! Is there value in sticking to a daily (or twice daily) feeding schedule, when it may take up to 10 days for a single feeding to be depleted? Or is it better to allow the starter to age long enough for the food to be fully consumed, and to become more concentrated with beasties?
This is a recipe of my own, adapted from a similar recipe I use for pancakes, which was based on a simple sourdough crumpet recipe (starter, salt, sugar, soda), which itself made half decent pancakes, or "pan-fakes" as my wife named them. The added eggs and oil make them more like real waffles (or pancakes), but are more airy and crispy than similar ones made from milk and straight flour. Combine all ingredients except the baking soda in a 1-quart or larger bowl, and whisk to combine. The batter should be slightly runny but not watery; adjust with flour as needed. When the waffle iron is ready, add the baking soda and stir. The acid in the starter will react with the baking soda and make the batter extremely bubbly, almost foamy. Scoop in about 1/2 cup or whatever's right for your iron, erring on the low side for the first waffle until you see how much it expands. They are great fresh, but also freeze and toast well. And so light, you may need to have seconds...
Hi folks. Very long time no post. I felt I just had to emerge from obscurity to let you know about my recent visit to Zita's Bang Bang Bakery in Siem Reap, Cambodia. (Zita's handle on TFL is BakingBadly, which I can tell you must be read as supremely ironic!). Fortunately, our hotel (the Mekong Angkor Boutique Hotel - great value BTW) was just 10 minutes' walk away from Bang Bang Bakery according to Googlemaps . It seemed longer and we were relieved to locate the bakery, which looks gleaming new. Retreating inside out of the building heat and humidity, we asked for Zita. There's a good reason he wasn't front of house. As the sole baker he's always on the graveyard shift. He hadn't mentioned that to me when agreeing to my suggested meet-up time of 10.30am. I imagine he would far rather have been off premises and catching up with some zzzs in bed than meeting up with someone whose only connection with him was The Fresh Loaf. The camaraderie of bakers...My partner and I both liked Zita a lot. He's centred and quietly spoken, LISTENS (something of a rarity these days, I find), and is considered and articulate in conversation. Lovely young bloke. Need I say, he's the one on the left? We had a really enjoyable chat about baking and Cambodia. Zita's taken on some serious challenges in establishing a commercial artisan bakery in Siem Reap. Followers of his blog posts on The Fresh Loaf will be acquainted with some of these, so I will not detail them here. Suffice to say, I greatly admire him for his courage and persistence in pushing on through all the barriers. Here's some pics of Bang Bang's produce - I'll zip up and let them do the talking. The cakes, by the way, are the work of Zita's talented partner (Jana, from memory - do I have that right, Zita?). I sampled one of Zita's bagels back in the hotel and am pleased (but not surprised) to report that it lived up to expectations.Thank you, Zita, for meeting up with us and showing us your bakery, and may you, Jana and your business prosper. You deserve to.To any readers thinking of visiting Siem Reap, I say do it. It's a very tourist-friendly town, somehow without being too touristy. There are restaurants everywhere serving Khmer food and all sorts of cuisines. Mostly v good quality and very cheap (high-end is there if you want that). The beers are cold and at 50c each during all-day "Happy Hour" are hard to resist. But of course, the great attraction is Angkor Wat. The entire vast temple complex - and especially Angkor Wat itself - is truly a wonder of humanity. I've been to every country in SE Asia, and India, and have seen a lot of temples, but Angkor Wat is really something else. Then there are the Cambodian people themselves, whom we found delightful, and I'm not just referring to hospitality staff. They're not only charming, but have a ready sense of humour, and they don't mind paying out on tourists as well as each other. I observed to Zita that they seemed to me to be a nation of jokers, and he agreed. And if you make it to Siem Reap and have a day off from hard-core temple clambering, do make the effort to pop into Bang Bang Bakery, sample the wares, and have a chat with Zita if he's there. I'm so glad we did.CHEERS all!RossPS: An update from Zita: he now has an assistant night baker, so hopefully that should lighten his load somewhat - and give him some nights off.
Hamelman Golden Raisin Bread, alfanso style.  With no evidence posted of this being made as baguettes, well, that opened the door for me with a welcome mat. At 69% hydration these are way too dry to French Fold.  The oatmeal flakes and WW work in tandem to ensure that.  By adding a few teaspoons of water over the course of kneading, the dough became (barely) more manageable and I probably raised the hydration to about 71%.  Rye was used instead of the designated white flour for the 125% levain, and I gave the mix a 10 minute hydrating rest period before adding salt and moving on to the hand mixing. The IDY was cut from 0.37% to 0.27% as these were destined to be retarded overnight instead of the prescribed straight linear bulk rise-divide & shape-proof-bake cycle.  And I probably could have eliminated the IDY totally. The bulk rise was cut down from 2 hours to 1.5 hours with two folds instead of the published one.  I added the fruit at the first letter fold. These took just about no flour on the couche, shed a fair amount of water, but released from the couche with delightful ease. Quite a dense crumb on the baguette despite the oven spring and modest grigne.  However, the taste was completely ordinary, and other than to boast that I made a bread with oatmeal, I really don't see returning to these again anytime soon.  In fairness, there is nothing wrong with them and they make a fine toast.  There just doesn't seem to be quite enough right with them. My second opportunity to make a Ziggy style batard (Ziggy is our own Abel Sierra's designation for this scoring), and I find it so easy using a straight ceramic blade and a lot of fun seeing it open.  comparison of the first and second Ziggy... 425g x 2 baguettes / long batards 725g x 1 Ziggy.
Part of the process of moving and opening up a bakery in a new land, is working with and testing the local flour. Here is a no-frills flour comparison between one American and two Spanish flours. Just flour and water at 67% hydration with no baking: *General Mills, Harvest King (MT, US) *Gabino Bobo, Ariana (Zamora, ES) *Roca, Eco Força (Lleida, ES) -Mark The Sinclair's Bakery Facebook Page
I had a request from a new customer for Rosemary bread the other day, so started poking around looking at recipes. There were previous posts on TFL about Daniel Leader's rosemary filone in "Local Breads" with some indication of difficulty in reproducing his results, but as I have the book I thought I'd give it a try. Being me, I didn't just make one or two but took orders for 11 and made 12, hoping it would turn out! The rosemary in my garden is at its peak right now - just ready to bloom, which is when the flavour is the best. And I have lots of it, so no trouble there. I also buy big jugs of extra-virgin olive oil from Costco, so lots of that too. The flour I used is Rogers All Purpose (Western Canada). I pretty much followed the recipe as published, making a firm biga to start which ripened overnight. The dough was mixed in the big Univex planetary mixer, following Leader's instructions for a KA mixer. There was a total of 9 kg of dough (I scale my recipes to 750 gram loaves). The dough was so silky and strong; I was very encouraged. And the smell of the dough was amazing! I also liked the colour - a lovely golden yellow from the fresh rosemary and EVOO. It was a dream to shape. The loaves proofed for about an hour, then were loaded onto peels and scored. I did change the baking instructions a bit. I preheated the granite stones to 450F, then loaded the bread with water in the steam pan. After 5 minutes I turned it down to 425F (actually, for the second batch I turned it down to 410F). Beautiful smell while it baked! And a lovely colour when finished. Unfortunately taking the photo without flash made the colour look a bit odd. :) The crumb is amazing - soft and light and so tasty. This bread is definitely a keeper. Oh, and the new customer sent me a note - "I have a complaint about your bread - it keeps getting in my mouth." :)
This is perhaps my 5th attempt at making bread with sourdough starter, without any commercial yeast. Three of my previous attempts used a Sourdough pain naturel recipe with various mixes of whole wheat, white bread flour, and unbleached all-purpose flour, and one was an improvised recipe using white flours. I used an overnight levain with only a small amount of starter (~15g) for all of these. For the 5th try, I used Flo Makanai's 1.2.3 method to make a small batch (2 short baguettes) using only unbleached all-purpose flour (Safeway brand), and I'm very happy with the result. The taste, crust, and crumb are every bit as good as my best commercial-yeast French bread (using Julia Child's recipe); it is slightly on the dense, too-chewy end of the spectrum, but that may not be a bad thing. I did not do an overnight levain this time; instead, I took the starter proportion straight from my mature culture (100% hydration by weight), which had not been fed in almost 24 hours. Here are the total proportions I used: In the past I've had some problems getting all the flour to be evenly moistened by the autolysis, and it can be hard to incorporate the salt into a shaggy autolysed dough, so I changed up the procedure a little this time, hoping to alleviate these. This morning, in a medium-sized bowl I combined 200g water with 200g flour, as kind of a "2/3 autolyse", since it leaves out 100g of the total flour. After mixing this, I sprinkled the 7g of table salt on top so it could start dissolving. About 30 minutes later, I added the remaining 100g flour, and the 100g of starter, and stirred just enough to moisten it. Unfortunately, it was still kind of lumpy due to the dry flour, but it smoothed out after a few stretch-and-slap-and-folds over the next couple hours. There was not a significant rise in volume during that time, but plenty of large bubbles, and the texture of the dough felt just right - silky, yielding, and sticky if you touch it for too long. By lunchtime it looked ready to be shaped into loaves. I went with two small baguettes, since the dough seemed pretty slack, and I didn't want one big flat chunk. These rose for almost two hours, nearly doubling in volume. I baked them on small cookie sheets on parchment paper, in a 450F oven on the upper rack for about 30 minutes. For steam, I use a broiler pan of water on the bottom rack, and a hand spritzer against the walls of the oven every few minutes. I also sprayed the top of the loaves a few times to give them a nice crust, and rotated the pans to get even browning. This is a recipe I will definitely use again!
No tangzhong in this method. I used my rye starter and also replaced 25% of the bread flour with wholewheat flour because I like a bit more texture. It cooled its heels in the fridge for nearly 2 days but rose beautifully and still produced a supersoft, light loaf.
CedarMountain posted this recently and it looked absolutely delicious so I pretty well followed his recipe aside from reducing the hydration and adding a tiny bit more levain just to use it all up. He makes a batard and a boule but I made 3 boules out of the one batch of dough. Dough 80 g sifted rye (90 g of rye berries) 170 g sifted Selkirk wheat (190 g wheat berries) 750 g unbleached flour 700 g water 20 g salt 250 g levain (100% hydration) whole wheat and bread flour to feed the levain (procedure explained below) Add-ins #1 50 g ground sesame seeds 100 g hemp hearts 150 g boiling water Add-ins #2 50 g chia seeds 50 g flax seeds 50 g toasted hemp seeds 250 g boiling water A couple of days before The night before going to bed Dough making day I got awesome oven rise out of these and they smell heavenly! This is a great recipe! Thanks for posting it, CedarMountain!
I have been trying to achieve an open crumb with 75% hydration but today I managed to achieve a nice open crumb with 65% hydration. This was the result of long autolyse and fermentation, gentle handling and lower than normal temperature baking. I am happy with the results and got me to appreciate that what goes on to achieve an open crumb is many other factors than just increasing the hydration level. Have you managed to get an open crumb too ? any other technique you can share ?
For whatever reason I have far too many half eaten bags of oats lying around my pantry.  So this week I baked a version of Sarah Owens' honey spelt oat bread - without the spelt.  As has been a theme of late for many of us, Trevor Wilson was the inspiration. Trevor has been posting on Instagram some great fluffy-crumb pastry flour breads. I didn't have any pastry flour to use so I improvised with some all-purpose, whole wheat and bread flours. I thought using an all-purpose flour with it's lower protein content would be a reasonable substitute for pastry flour. I used : 140g of flaked oats in an overnight soaker with a 110g mature levain (using AP flour) ; 45g of amber honey (I think next time I'll use maple syrup as "tis the season" in Canada) ; 105g AP flour ; 45 g whole-wheat flour ; 400g hard bread flour ; and 11g salt. Total flour (including the levain) was 605 g (26.4% AP, 7.5% whole-wheat and 66% bread). Total water (including levain and soaker but not the water content in the honey) was 575g.  So the hydration is about 92% - but it wasn't anywhere near as slack a dough as you'd think given that number because the oats were thirsty. I'd increase it to 100% next time just to see how it changed it. This was a stiff dough. I worked the levain and water into a slurry and it took a while to incorporate the soaker and break down what by the next day became a dense clump of moist oats. Trying to create structure to build an open crumb was near impossible as the dough wasn't very extensible. After all was mixed together I gave it three additional stretch and folds (as best was possible) an hour apart while it sat in a warm spot in my kitchen. I then placed it into my oven with the light on for bulk - another four hours. When it had clearly doubled I divided the dough, pre-shaped into boules and gave it a short bench rest before shaping into batards for an overnight fridge retard. Bake was mid-morning at 450 for 20 and 15 in a combo cooker. They had a great rise and bloomed very well. The one issue I had with them was that in the morning the dough seam had split open a fair bit on both loaves (they were loaded seam side up in the baskets). I wet them a bit with my hand and then tried to stick them shut just before loading them into the combo cooker. The crumb below is very soft and fluffy - it's very nice and the flavour is very earthy.  The oats really come through. The honey is noticeable but not overwhelming. At the base of the loaves you can see the spot where I tried to wet and then stick the dough together just before loading - it's a 'damp spot'.  This was just a shaping technique mistake - I should have made sure to properly close the seam when I shaped them the night before. Overall, a great bake and one I'll repeat many times! Bake happy..
Just over one year ago, I made the journey from Belgrade, Montana to Madrid, Spain with my bakery trailer, truck and all of my other household goodies. During the past year as I wait, wait, wait, and wait some more, I've been sorting through the red tape and keeping myself busy through baking, teaching, and also working construction. Through my previous European tours, I had made some very nice friendships in Moscow, Prague and the Netherlands.  Recently I had the opportunity to re-visit them. Last week to celebrate Easter, I decided to invite some of my local friends to the bakery warehouse to make hot cross buns and Apfelstrudel. As you can imagine, thus far it has been quite a laborious, frustrating and expensive journey. However I am hopeful that the worst is behind me and very soon I will be baking and selling for my new customers here in Spain. -Mark PS, if you'd like a more detailed look at the bakery and what I'm up to, be sure to check out my bakery Facebook page February 2017: arrival in Madrid via Barcelona, ES and Galveston, TX Moscow workshop PIR Expo, Moscow PIR Expo, Moscow Den Haag, NL Workshop Roscon de Reyes for Christmas time here in Spain Hot Cross Buns with friends in the trailer Spring Cleaning at the bakery warehouse in Pinto, Spain
I bought some "Country Wild Rice" at Whole Foods a few weeks ago and wanted to use some of the leftover cooked rice in a bread.  The rice is a combo of brown, whole grain Wehani, and whole grain black Japonica and is very tasty all by itself. I had some Guinness left over from the corned beef my wife made in the Instant Pot a few weeks ago and I thought some fresh milled barley flour would go perfect with this combination. Just for good measure I added some freshly made Greek Yogurt and I have to say it really combined well with the rice and produced quite the moist bread.  The crumb shot may look like it is under-cooked, but that's just the lighting.  The crumb is perfect and the taste is amazing.  This one is perfect with some sharp cheese or used for a grilled steak sandwich like I'm eating tonight for dinner. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours , yogurt and 375 grams of the Guinness together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 1 hour.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces),cooked and cooled wild rice and the balance of the beer and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours (If you use a proofer set to 78 degrees you can finish in about 1.5 hours). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 - 1.5 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 525 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 2 minutes lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Multigrain, seeded bread - using up end of bag of wholemeal flour, hence 84g wholemeal, 75g dark rye, 300g white bead flour, with 3malt sunflower seed flour to make up to 800g, 400g 50% starter, 650g water. Autolysed for just under an hour, 20g salt added and dough developed. 150g mixed ‘seeds’ added towards end of slap and folds (cut malted rye grains, pumpkin, sunflower, sesame, linseed,poppy), then 3 sets of stretch and folds over next hour and a half, as dough seemed slacker than I was expected. In total, 4 hours of bulk at room temp (probably about 66-68 as heating not on initially). Dough rising, but probably not quite there when I pre-shaped. I needed to go out, and didn’t want to put it in the fridge at that point, as that wouldn’t have been compatible with a bake for breakfast...... Boules felt reasonable, but I wasn’t really convinced by my batard shaping...not enough tension generated. Into fridge after about 3 hours (when home from Pilates and swim). Baked straight from there this morning. Batard in non-fan oven on pre-heated stone with steam, and boules in cloche in the fan oven. Cut the batard about 40mins after it was out of the oven- scrambled goose eggs, tomatoes and mushrooms were ready😉. Flavour really good, but crumb tight and lack of oven spring compared to the boules (which were smaller). My other half tells me to stop moaning about the crumb as the crust and flavour are so good! Don’t know about the crumb of the boules, as they are destined for the freezer. Does anyone else have to decide on their dinner menu in order to make room in the freezer for the current bake? More seriously though, do people think my lack of rise in the batard is lack of bulk ferment time, poor shaping, the difference in baking environment - or probably a combination...... Gill
This is a pretty bold bake on my Hamelman 50% WW multigrain with freshly home milled kamut in place of WW.  I sifted and used the hard bits in the levain.  My hot soaker was a mix of durum, toasted old bread crumbs from my last batch, brown flax (left whole for a change), mixed rolled grains, and my faux red rye malt.  The cold final rise was about 18 hours.  I was happy that the timing worked for me to give the less bold loaf to my mother for her 81st birthday.  We were both pleased with the taste. I was hoping for a more open structure, but it's not dense either.  I just read here that you can expect a denser loaf with kamut (http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/55892/khoisan-flour-says-15-gram-protein). I also read in the latest Breadtopia post  (https://breadtopia.com/how-to-get-an-open-crumb-with-whole-grain-sourdough-bread/) that cold final rises result in a denser middle, and mine certainly evidences that.
Crisp and flaky sesame pockets. I have wanted to try my hand at these for a while. I don't think I had the best recipe and had to improvise a bit. They came out ok and we enjoyed the nutty taste. And I now have a sesame coated kitchen. More recipes I found interesting: https://food52.com/recipes/26083-explosively-layered-sesame-shao-bing http://hidysabc.com/blog/recipe/taiwanese-shao-bing/ https://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes/hunan-beef-and-peppers-pop-and-sesame-shao-bing-chinese-pita-recipe-1939051 My original recipe here: https://www.gourmettraveller.com.au/recipes/chefs-recipes/sesame-seed-pocket-pita-bread-with-chicken-7242
Hi guys, I' m a cook in Italy, and getting a break,  I would improve my passion for bread alone in my home. Many times for the oven I ve got (an old gas one without vent) I felt limited and frustrated, for problem such as keeping the vapour initially  and the size of the chamber, making only one or two loaves a time, etc.. I live in italy and solutions for home baker such as Rofco ovens are not available. Anyone knows  solutions similar to rofco, that permit to have large chamber for 6~8loaves a time, low electricity consumption and  steam vent.? Thank you and have a beautiful day~ Davide
After a couple of really good attempts to recreate a Brooklyn style pizza, I had a couple of disasters. Trying to slide a 16" dough disk onto a 16" steel proved to need more precision than I could muster.  I was ready to quit, when my wife reminded me how good the pies were before I got the steel. On her advice I combined the two methods. Pizza screen on the steel.
My husband and I are taking our first trip anywhere since we were married 3 years ago. We didn't have the funds for a honeymoon and the kiddo was created just one month after we said our vows.  This year, for my birthday, I asked him to arrange a long weekend and surprise me with the destination. I wanted somewhere close enough that we could be back in a flash if necessary, but far enough that we had to take a plane. He chose Portland. Naturally, I hear Portland and I think Ken Forkish. We're only going to be there for a couple days, but trips to his bakery and pizzeria are a top priority. Thus in preparation, I ordered Elements of Pizza. I've only been at bread baking for just over a year. But I've been at pizza for over a decade. I spent 10 years working in the industry and I have a husband who loses his  $&*^! at the mention of a Neopolitan pizza. Together, we spent years in pursuit of delicious pizza -- at restaurants and at home. A few months ago, we made a trip to Central Milling. Much to our surprise and delight, we encountered Tony Gemignani's 00 flour. I've always understood that 00 requires north of 900 degrees, so I generally don't bother with it. But it's Tony. Tony of legend...Tony of some of the most delicious pizza I've ever had...Tony whose restaurant we never pass up even if it means we have to get in line half an hour early and eat our pizza standing up on the side of the road. So, yeah...we bought the flour with no real plans to use it. In his 24-48 hour dough, Forkish calls for 00. I was skeptical for the reasons I mentioned. I also didn't think it could match the flavor of my usual 3 day cold fermented dough. But I followed the recipe. Anyway, it was the perfect opportunity to try this special edition 00 flour from The Legend. I used my baking method. I developed it across much trial and error and it's the closest I can get to foolproof and repeatable results in the home oven. It solves two critical problems a). messy pizza transfers. b) the bottom being done before the top or vice versa. (I have never been able to get good results with the stone at the top rack under the broiler. My oven just isn't good enough and has too many hot spots. So, treating the bottom and top separately in this manner was a revelation.) Amy's Pizza Baking Method 1. Place two oven racks in the oven. One at the lowest position and one at the highest position. Place steel or pizza stone on lowest rack. 2. Pre-heat oven at 550F for an hour. 3. Shape dough into disk. Transfer to parchment paper and top pizza as desired. 4. Use a peel to place the pizza with parchment paper on the lower rack's pizza stone. 5. After 2 minutes, your dough should be set enough to allow you to easily remove the parchment paper. Using tongs and pizza peel, remove the parchment paper. 6. Continue cooking until your pizza's bottom has reached your desired level of doneness. 7. Transfer pizza directly to the top rack. (It should have no problem being supported by the rack as the crust is well set at this point) and turn on the broiler. 8. Broil for 1-2 minutes until the top of your pizza has reached your desired level of doneness. Don't walk away. Watch it through your window so you know exactly when to pull it. Forkish calls for a 7 minute bake time. I did 6 minutes on the bottom rack and 1 minute on the top. This pizza turned out a little too crispy. I did the second pizza for 5 minutes on the bottom rack and 90 seconds on the top rack. This was absolutely perfect. It had a thin crisp layer on the outside but a soft, air center. It was full of flavor. The difference in those 30 seconds from the first pizza to the second is transformative. It's not a matter of heat loss as the oven remained on and re-heated for half an hour between pies. My pictures are not plentiful or super revealing, but this was really a great dough. Before bake the dough was more supple than any dough I've ever worked with, even without oil. This is some really good flour and it made a great pie.
I know it’s spring…not fall but the pumpkins sold in supermarket look gorgeous. If you’ve read my previous pumpkin pancakes post, you know I hate pumpkin. However, I can take it when it’s mashed and mixed into pancakes and bread, and to be honest, I adore the striking yellow-orange colour they add to the dough. Although I did some research on the proportion of pumpkin usually incorporated to bread dough, the hydration level and the cream cheese filling ingredients are totally are not adopted from other recipes. I just kept adding water until the dough felt right to me and adjusting the filling ingredients until it tasted well-balanced. Pumpkin cream cheese roll---in the form of sourdough bread For leaven: 25g      6.5%      Starter 17g      4.5%      Whole wheat flour 15g       4%       Water For dough: 380g     100%     Whole wheat flour 240g      63%      Water 220g      58%      Mashed pumpkin (I pressure cooked Kabocha squash, you may need to add more water if you                                      option for roasted pumpkin) 57g       15%       Leaven 6g         1.6%      Salt 10g       2.6%     Vital wheat gluten For filling: 200g     53%      1/3 less fat cream cheese 25g      6.5%       Honey 20g         5%       Lemon juice 20g         5%       Water ______________ 411.5g    100%     Whole grain 267.5g     65%     Total hydration (excluding the pumpkin which offers a significant amount of moisture) Combine all leaven ingredients and let sit until doubled, about 6-8 hours. Roughly combine all dough and let ferment overnight for 10 hours. Mix all ingredients for the filling into a spreadable paste and keep refrigerated until one hour before the dough completes the overnight ferment. Turn the dough out of the bowl and stretch and fold for a few times, then let rest for 20 minutes. Gently stretch the dough into a rectangle with the 2 sides being the length of the bread pan (8 inch for mine). Spread the filling onto the dough, leaving at least one inch on the edges of the 2 sides with the length of the pan. Roll the dough into a log and pinch the end together. Place into the bread pan and let proof for 1.5 hours. Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 204°C/400°F. Bake at 204°C/400°F for 35 minutes. Turn the bread out of the pan and bake for 5 more minutes or until well-browned and internal temperature reaches a minimum of 190°F. This bread is slightly sour and only very subtly sweet. It tastes like naturally sweet pumpkin but not sugary pumpkin pie so if you should add some cinnamon, ginger and nutmeg along with a few tablespoons of sugar if that’s the route you’d like to take. The cream cheese filling provided a pleasant tang and slight sweetness that goes really well with this surprisingly light-tasting bread. The crumb is very moist and tender thanks to the pumpkin and sourdough even if it’s 100% whole wheat. The crust is slightly crunchy out of the oven but softens and turns pleasingly chewy as it cools. Who knows pumpkin bread can be so refreshing that it reminds me of spring? Let’s celebrate spring…with pumpkin cream cheese bread!
I spent the last few days working on a 75% hydration sourdough with 10% rye and 10% whole wheat. At the first fold I divided the dough in two and added some inclusions to each half. One half had kalamata olive, fresh rosemary and lavander while the other had hemp heart and flaxseed. For my first attempt I’m feeling ok with the results but I’m sure there’s room for improvements. I hope to gain more experience and confidence with the breads I try out.
https://www.simplemost.com/dachshund-museum-germany/
Smell is great.  Unsure if I baked it long enough.  It sounded hollow when I first checked, but now that it’s cooling, not so much!
Based on Katie and Sarah’s recipe for whole wheat sourdough crackers, this is my humble adaptation: 200 grams of ‘discard’ (mine is a dark rye) 60 grams fat (coconut oil, butter, lard). Loving the coconut. 200 grams flour (spelt is great, white bread flour is good, dark rye is fine, white rye too) 1 teaspoon salt Make a stiff dough, using these ingredients, which are all approximate measures.  Cover and let sit at room temperature for 5-6 hours.  One person I know let’s the dough sit for 4 hours.  So be as creative as you like with all of the above! Roll very thin on parchment.  Score with a pizza cutter. Brush with olive oil, then an egg wash.  Grind salt on the tops, and sprinkle with caraway, sesame seeds, or your choice of herbs. (Finely grated cheese was a big hit). Bake for about 15 minutes at 350. Original recipe is found here: https://www.kitchenstewardship.com/whole-wheat-sourdough-crackers/ Thank you Katie and Sarah!
Hello Freshloafers!  It's been a while.  I wanted to update a few things.  Mainly me : )   Looks like I could use some practice posting ! Always nice to check in once in a while and see so many of my favorite bakers, baking! Here's a little helpful hint I came up with for making a fast banneton for your loaves.  Maybe other's have used this idea but I have never seen it.  SIMPLY use the top half of an egg carton...walla, instant banneton.  Just line it with parchment paper. I baked 3 loaves today.  Using trailrunners suggested use of the roaster pan.  I wanted a fast heat up as these loaves were no particular formula.  I just wanted to use up some extra starter. The roaster pan worked great, other than the loaves burning a little on the bottom.  I sum that up to having to place the large RP in my larger bottom oven that heats from the bottom.   I particularly liked the less heating time before baking.  It's starting to warm up in San Diego. I love French Macarons!  This one simply has an eatable wafer I placed upon it.  Lately I've been having fun doing artfully decorated cookies.  A few can take hours of work.  But I find it relaxing and enjoyable.  They are best frozen and given away : ) Life's Good,  Keep on Baking! Sylvia
It was time to start clearing out the fridge of ends and bits of stuff, mostly dried fruit, left over from previous bakes. Unfortunately, I didn’t get through all the bits but a lot of them found themselves into this bread. Makes 3 loaves Dough 151 g freshly milled sifted Red Fife flour (170 g Red Fife berries) 152 g freshly milled sifted Kamut flour (170 g Kamut berries) 97 g freshly milled sifted Einkorn flour (115 g Einkorn berries) 552 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax seeds 650 g water 20 pink Himalayan salt 30 g yogurt 266 g of 80% hydration levain (procedure outlined in recipe) Add-ins 50 g bulgur 50 g hemp hearts 25 g sesame seeds 125 g of mixed dried fruit (thompson and golden raisins, chopped dates, mixed peel and currants) 30 g honey 200 g boiling water Two days before: The night before: Dough: Baking: Enjoy!
fired up my wood oven yesterday for first time this season. Made my whole dinner in it even desert. Next nice day I’m ready for bread
All Is (not) Lost.. first let me say that I'm referring to this weekend's bake and the movie by a similar name - All is Lost with Robert Redford (100% rotten tomatoes in my book). Last week I made a Honey Oat Loaf with all purpose, bread and a tiny amount of whole-wheat flour. This week I decided to use Canadian maple syrup as the sap is flowing in these parts and amp'd up the whole wheat flour and hydration as I always find that loaf a bit dry to handle. I also thought I should increase the hydration given the increased whole wheat flour content. I prepared the overnight soaker using 70g flaked oats and 140g boiling water.  And fed my very active starter at the same time with 100% hydration using AP flour. I also gave the flour an overnight on the counter autolyse using 115g bread flour, 90g whole wheat and 20g AP flour (total flour 225g) with 165g of warm water (hydrated to 73%). Including the water in the oats, the dough hydration was about 135%. I'm not sure if you calculate the hydration differently when using a soaker (anyone?). The next morning I combined the soaker, with 20g of maple syrup, 6g salt, 55g of levain and the hydrated flour.  It was pretty soft and sticky so I thew it into the mixer for five minutes at medium until I got a windowpane. The dough was very silky to handle. Over the next three hours I gave it about four stretch and folds. I then let it sit for about six hours until it doubled. I tried to be gentle but it mostly deflated as I poured it onto my bench. It was very tacky so my attempts at a good pre-shape were useless. I decided to pour it into a Pyrex loaf pan and threw it into the fridge. This morning I brought it to room temp and in total it might have doubled again. I baked with the loaf pan on a pizza stone and added about a cup of hot water into a pan to steam the oven a bit. I baked at 450 for about 35 minutes or so to an internal temp of about 205 degrees. It was a bit tricky to get out of the Pyrex loaf pan and used knife to pry it out - is there a trick to getting a non-stick result in a glass loaf pan when baking a high hydration bread? I'd rather not use grease or the like on the pan. We had some for lunch today. Here she is: Indeed, all was not lost. I'm surprised it turned out edible at all. The crumb is very soft and not too moist. The whole wheat flavor dominates and I don't get a strong sense of the oats and can't perceive the maple syrup. I would definitely dial back the hydration next time and I would probably double the maple syrup.
Just getting back to baking after extended Spring vacation in Hawaii. 600g bread flour 150g Red Fife 150g Kamut 100g AYW levain built using one time feed of flour to AYW and left in warm oven a couple hours. Was VERY active 100g Rye levain- did several builds over a few hours to get my 10g of stored starter active again. Left in warm oven all night. Stirred down the next morning and fed again and left for a few hours. 550 g total liquid - 300g AYW + 250 H2O ( additional water on counter for s&f approx 50-100 g) 50g ground flax misted to moisten before adding to dough 20 g Kosher salt Mixed everything but salt. Left in sunny window a couple hours. Did a couple stretch and folds added salt on first set then placed in bucket. Repeat this q30 min x 3. Bulk ferment till 75% took a couple hours in warm oven. Shaped and placed in fridge for about 16 hrs. Baked in hot roaster at 475 covered 25 min with 4 small pieces of ice. Removed cover and cont to bake 20 min. Really pretty crust due to Kamut and caramelization of the AYW. Very nice oven spring. Did my usual " no shaping" shaping. Left to crack and make ears as it will. Posting crumb later.
One of my favorite books on bread is Lionel Vatinet's A Passion for Bread. Ciabatta is a favorite of mine so it only seemed natural to try my hand at his version. I also wanted to see how well my hands would handle this wet dough. Overall I was pleased with the results of this bread. It was great when dipped in some oil and balsamic. Although I don't think I'm ready for the big leagues at all but I'm excited to keep learning and trying new things!
Fellow Bakers, I had the opportunity to get some special flour named Ruchmehl, which is used to make a darker bread in Switzerland. It is some sort of half-half wheat flour that provides a darker color to the crumb and nutty flavor. This flour is widely used in Switzerland for their daily bread. The process was quite standard. Levain: 10 g starter 50 g Ruchmhel 50 g water Matured for about 18 hrs, which produced some sour notes to the bread flavor. Dough: All levain 245 g Ruchmehl 149 g water 4 g salt Mixed well and kneaded for about 2 minutes on the counter. Applied 1 stretch and fold within the first 30 min into the fermentation. Let ferment for 1 hour and placed it in the fridge for 6 hours, then applied another S&F. Let it in the fridge for another 3 to 4 hours (can't remember well). Removed from the fridge and let rest on the counter for about 3 hours (final fermentation had some bubbles on the sides). Shaped and proofed for 45 min, then baked on a preheated oven / pot for 25 min lid on + 10 min lid off at 230C / 450 F. I am pleased with the final result, including color, crust and crumb. The loaf presented a great nutty flavor with some tang notes, but nothing too overwhelming. The crumb showed a lot of small holes to my surprise, and that was a first for me. If you have any experience with this kind of flour, please share here.
The holiday is over.  It was an awesome 3 week trip to our South Island incorporating a 7 day adventure of 4WD in back country, catching up with relations and exploring parts of the country I had never seen before. So it is great to eat home made bread again.  Today's bake was a simple loaf of 72% bread flour, 22% rye (freshly milled) and 6% whole wheat (freshly milled) at 77% hydration.  Refreshed starter which had been languishing in the fridge since Mid March, built the levain on Saturday evening, mixed the dough early afternoon Sunday.  I did a hour long autolyse followed by hand incorporating of levain, and salt.  I did 2 sets of 10 slap and folds and 1 stretch and fold.  The dough was left to almost double.  It was nice to handle and far away from the stickiness and problems I had had with Country Style Champlain bakes.  Preshaped just before dinner, then shaped and popped dough in banneton dusted with bran into fridge overnight.  It was baked for 15 minutes at 250 deg C in DO with lid on, and fan on to keep temperature up followed by 15 minutes at 425 deg C. It is a great everyday bread that I haven't made for a while. Crumb shot, sitting on the sunny bench. On my travels we visited an organic farm near Christchurch to buy wheat, rye and spelt berries and also some barley flakes.  So in addition to the above bake, I made 2 small loaves comparing the 2 lots of wheat berries that I now have - one from North Island (2)and one from South Island (3).  I used 25% freshly milled wheat and followed the same time lines as above.  Hydration was about 70% so I wasn't pushing it. There seems to be a bit more volume in bread (2) on left, which was North Island grain. This surprised me as I expected it to be the other way. Crumb shots Nothing dramatic, just every day loaves - a good bake. Leslie
Here is a simple method for processing leftover starter into a versatile ingredient that can favorably increase the complexity of a bread's flavor profile.  It's a "toadie" in dabrownman's parlance. Perhaps a “cheat” in yours. Ok, it's not strictly altus. It had aspirations to become bread but never got the call.  Hence “Alt”. Here’s the...What forA few reasons. Uses for Leftover Starter is a recurrent theme at TFL.  Periodically air-drying some as a backup should be #1 on everybody’s list.  Baking it into croccantini is a favorite, especially if you accumulate large quantities of spent fuel (true, that link is not about leftover starter, but her video is a hoot.  You’ll never hear Mary Berry say, “Oh shit I forgot to add the rosemary!”).  Or you can just make another loaf with it (try mine or fernerz).  Here it gets baked, pulverized and christened “ingredient”.  Another nobler destiny for your spent fuel than an ignominious plop into the bin.Second, I harbor a bit of an obsession with the Maillard reaction, likely owing to the relative dearth of its craveable products in our home’s vegetarian cuisine (me by choice because of my dearest’s inherited intolerance of meat).  Dry-toasted “toadies” and grano arso are short on Maillard products owing to their deficit of a key reagent required to mobilize reducing sugars and amino acids so that they can encounter each other and spontaneously react: water.Third, I discovered a while back that fearless flavor prospectors Cortney Burns and Nick Balla included pulverized, blackened bread in Bar Tartine’s wacky cache of flavorings.  Fancy that. Right there on the rack alongside turmeric and allspice (as well as powdered dehydrated beet, kale and parsnip).Fourth, I’ve noticed that when our oven steam apparatus shamelessly drips where it shouldn’t -- onto the loaf baking below -- the resulting bit of wet-burned crust can be surprisingly tasty.Finally, a fellow loafer recently posted a query about preserving starter by drying it down in the oven – a strategy doomed to be about as gratifying as drying a bathed cat in the microwave.  Maybe he meant “proofer”. Regardless, that suggestion may have catalyzed the coalescence of the above sources into the process and product described below.  I have serially tinkered with the method over for the past several months. It’s very simple and forgiving. All loaves pictured here are 60% fresh-milled wheat with 1-3% Alt Altus-coated oat porridge added.  Without further ado, here’s the ...How to 1. Preheat oven to 400˚F.  A countertop toaster oven serves well if you have a small amount of leftover starter to process.  Avoid convection as it will render your Alt Altus case-hardened (crisp outside, soft inside) or quickly blackened if you are not properly attentive. 2. Dilute your leftover starter, if necessary, to turn it into a thick batter (*see footnote).  Don’t add too much water – just enough to make it viscously pourable. Aim for 110% hydration if your starter is less than that.  [Note: Fresh leftover starter is best, so make this soon after serially refreshing your starter for a bake.  For example, bake your Alt Altus while the dough from which the starter was left over is final-proving and the oven is pre-heating.  Ancient starter dredged from deep in the fridge yields a bitter product.]3.  Position parchment paper on a sheet pan and pour diluted starter onto it in a tight switchback pattern of narrow bands close enough to one another to ooze together into a very shallow irregular puddle.  A baking sheet with an efficient non-stick coating can be used instead of parchment paper. Recommended: Sprinkle fine salt over the surface of the puddle now.  This can make the final product somewhat snackable, especially if you bake it more blonde than bold.  It’s always reassuring to add an ingredient to bread dough that already tastes good enough to eat by itself.  Salt does that here.4.  Put your preparation into the oven or toaster oven. 5. After 6-8 minutes, when the surface has become dry to the touch and is beginning to tan, flip the paper over with the lightly baked product still attached, now underneath.  Return it to the oven to dry the parchment-product interface sufficiently to free the paper when you next open the oven.6.  After another 6-8 minutes, remove it from the oven and carefully peel off and discard the paper.  Separation anxiety may necessitate gentle encouragement with a spatula.7.  Return product to the oven and repeat flipping and rotating it every 5-7 minutes.  Begin to break off product to a countertop plate as edges acquire a shade you’re comfortable with along the blonde > chestnut > black spectrum.  Parts will brown at different rates, so keep a close eye.  Reduce the time interval between tests as the process accelerates to completion.  Reward your patience by toasting some pistachios on the baking tray ;-).8.  Turn off the oven, open the door and put the plated product back inside until the oven is barely warm.  Convection (with no heat) helps here. 9.  Cool fully on the countertop. 10.  Like dried herbs or coffee, the product is best stored intact and pulverized just before use.  A modernist might store it under vacuum. The rest of us: a ziploc bag. When ready to use, pulverize in a mortar, food processor, coffee/spice grinder, grain mill or ziploc bag+rolling pin.  UsesThe amount of Alt Altus to add in any application depends upon the boldness with which it was baked and, of course, personal taste.  The darker product can be quite potent and is best deployed sparingly for optimum effect. Otherwise its strident notes can overwhelm others with which it should gracefully harmonize.•  Add granulated product equal to 1-3% of total flour to any bread formula. Our preferred method is to mix it, coarsely ground to drip coffee sized bits, at 3% into cooked, cooled, broken-up porridge that is ready to be added to dough at the second fold. This also conveniently reduces clumping of porridge additions.     •  Fold it at 1-3% of total flour into pizza or pasta dough (al grano arso) or polenta (to give it an authentic saracena look, if not exactly the flavor).    •  Jump-start a gumbo’s roux with finely powdered product (Warning: May be a capital offense in some Louisiana parishes).    •  Add powdered product to any chili, gravy, sauce espagnole or veggie burger mix.    •  Consult Burns & Balla. ProspectIt has not escaped our notice that creatively varying the ingredients in this method could yield some novel flavors. Sourdough starter is just flour (here wheat, spelt and rye) fermented in water by sourdough microbes. One could prepare an Alt Altus batter from scratch (i.e., not from leftover starter) in which the flour was replaced or supplemented with powdered substrates prepared from other cereals, legumes or even dehydrated vegetables.  The liquid in which they are suspended (with or without fermentation) to create the batter could alternatively be apple/raisin yeast water, other populations of fermentative microbes or simply water supplemented with a suitable solute (shoyu, Marsala, Marmite, liquid aminos*). Toasting such batters and pulverizing the products to generate “spices” would subtly expand the flavor space represented by most pantries. Happy Baking,Tom ____________* Including liquid aminos (up to 10% v/v of total leftover starter - more than that becomes Weapons Grade) in the dilution liquid makes a somewhat richer Alt Altus. Reduce added salt when including this or other salty supplement.
took advantage of the cooler weather in New Jersey today and baked  olive rosemary loaves. Smell wonderful
Had a few experimental mishaps (couldn't generate enough surface tension to get good oven spring, etc) so I needed a win. Made this pumpernickel using the recipe on KAF's website...can't wait to crack into it (my son's already planning to make rubens tomorrow).
Yesterday’s bake
After years of practice and changing steps to make the process simpler, I think I finally have the classic sourdough loaf down. The crumb was good, too. I use a very simple process and try to minimize the clean up.  Approximately 1 cup starter, fed and on the rise; mix with one cup water; add 1 cup whole wheat flour, 1 cup bread flour and 1/2-1 cup more to get the dough to the consistency you desire. Mix well, cover and leave for one hour to autolyze. Mix in 1 T salt and 1-2 T olive and mix with dough scraper, turning several times.  Cover and leave for 30 minutes. Turn the dough in the bowl two more times, every 30 minutes. After final turn, leave on counter at room temp for 90 minutes.  Refrigerate for several hours or overnight.  Shape into boule and place in banneton to rise for several hours or overnight.  Bake in cloche at 500 degrees with lid on for about 30 minutes and 10-15 minutes with the lid off at 465 degrees (convection if you have it). I bake this loaf several times a week when I can!
Tangzhong is the technique of heating a portion of the flour and liquid in your recipe to approximately 65C to make a paste (roux).  At this temperature the flour undergoes a change and gelatinizes.  By adding this roux to your final dough it will help create a soft, fluffy, moist open crumb.  It is also supposed to help prevent the bread from going stale. It is not very difficult to do a Tangzhong.  Use a  5 to 1 liquid to solid ratio (so 250g liquid to 50g flour) and mix it together in a pan.  Heat the pan while stirring constantly.  Initially it will remain a liquid, but as you approach 65C it will undergo a change and thicken to an almost pudding like consistency.  Take it off the heat and let it cool before using it in your recipe.  Some people will refrigerate it for a while but you can use it right away as soon as it cools. I really liked the way the fresh milled barley flour tasted in the last Guinness bread I baked and wanted to use a higher percentage in this bake.  I added some left-over mashed potatoes skin on along with some freshly made Greek yogurt along with the Tangzhong really made a tasty and moist crumb.  These rolls taste terrific with just some simple cheese or butter but will make a great burger bun as well.  Now if we can only get some nice weather for a cook-out! Formula Download BreadStorm file here. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I usually do this the night before. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Prepare the Tangzhong per directions above and allow to cool to room temperature. Mix the flours, yogurt, potatoes, and water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 20-30 minutes.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), and Tangzhong and mix on low for a total of 4 minutes in your mixer.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 1.5 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 to 1.5 hours.  Remove the dough and cut into equal size pieces and shape into rolls.  Place on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper and cover with moist tea towels or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 500 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, using a simple egg wash brush each roll and sprinkle on your topping of choice.   Next add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 435 degrees.  Bake for 35 minutes or until the crust is nice and brown. Take the rolls out of the oven when done and let them cool on a bakers rack before eating if you can wait.
Hi, I was checking the protein content of King Arthur flours and since White WHole Wheat has 13% and bread flour 12.7% I was wondering if I could swap it in a recipe for yeasted bread? Has anybody tried that, or has any input in pros and cons of doing it? Thanks.
Well, as I wait for the oven to preheat I suppose I can post about what I was pulling from the oven at 1:30am. This all started from me asking in the forum about what I should try next and it was suggested that I give Hokkaido Milk Bread a whirl! Once I saw the Tangzhong method I knew I was going to have to do it. Next was to study and decide on the recipe, but there are so many versions and I couldn't settle on just one, so I adapted one of my own from several different ways. But I couldn't find anything to write on as the juices were flowing hence my decision to start on a toy until I could track down pencil and paper. Basically, all I did was make the Tangzhong the night before and then mixed it all up in my KitchenAid and went to town on first proof, folding, second proof, dividing, preshaping, more proofing, rolling, shaping, panning, more proofing, preheating, egg washing, baking, rotating, baking, rotating, baking, cooling, decide I'm too impatient to wait, eat one while it's hot, go to be at 2am, get up at 5:30 am and  play with the two sourdough I left to proof before bed. Ok time to get them in the oven, I hope they come out fine.
I had a great success in sourdough this week, with the most impossibly light and even crumb.My previous sourdough, and many photos I've seen of quality sourdough, have a preponderance of large irregular bubbles. This is totally unlike that.
This morning I baked off two sourdough loaves that I mixed and shaped last night (2am). I made a 60% WW dough at 75% hydration and add two types of inclusions at the first fold. The first half got some parmesan and Kerrygold Dubliner cheeses mixed in and the other half was studded with rum soaked dates, toasted pecans, and cocoa. They both taste great and again, as a newcomer to this whole world, I'd love your input, comments and feedback.
This sourdough loaf owes its colour to activated charcoal. I discovered this bread and heaps of information on the use of charcoal on Bake-Street.com and could not resist. My dough did not look dark enough to me. I thought it resembled window putty so I added 1/2 gram extra charcoal. I still thought it was too light but resisted the temptation to add black food colouring. It turned quite dark during baking, so I need not have worried. It is a tasty loaf with a good crust and soft as a cloud inside. To decorate my loaf I cut a stencil with hearts from baking paper both because I love baking and, while preparing it, the radio played Melanie Gardot singing: Your Heart is as Black as Night. An appropriate title for this post. Don't leave out the black sesame. It really complements the taste of this bread. Recipe here:  https://bake-street.com/en/sourdough-charcoal-bread/
My brother asked to add him to my bread list on a bi-weekly basis. Diabetes runs in the family and his doctor has told him to give up white bread in order to stay ahead of the game. So who best to emulate and steal recipes from but our very own Dabrownman! Well, while doing that, I discovered that Lucy is truly an evil creature! A four short legged creature, but evil nonetheless! The things that she puts Dab through in order to produce a loaf is nothing short of torture. No wonder his recipes start on Monday and finish on Friday. I spent a good part of each day this week, dealing with a myriad of different steps and discovering a few things along the way: So here is the recipe: Makes 3 loaves Dough: 261 g of sprouted flour from Red Fife, rye, Spelt, Buckwheat (use hulled, not unhulled like I did, it will save you a lot of grief and agravation), Oats, Kamut, Selkirk wheat (hard red spring wheat variety), and Einkorn berries. (I used 62 g of each grain for sprouting. Next time, I think I would increase this to ~65 g. Process for making this flour explained below.) 355 g unbleached flour 330 g bread flour 700 g of water + 25 g 22 g salt 35 g yogurt 352 g 100% hydration levain (builds explained below) Add-ins: 88 g pumpkin seeds 88 g sunflower seeds 88 g flax seeds Making the sprouted flour: Add-ins: Levain Builds: Main dough: Baking: The boules felt quite firm when I took them out of the bannetons and I had doubts about good oven spring. This was justified as the first batch of six had minimal oven spring.  So I took out the other half dozen out of the fridge and let them warm up about 45 minutes on the counter before baking. The second batch had very slightly better oven rise and I got a deeper colour on the crust for some reason. So not a bad bake for Earth Day as I don’t think you can get more earthy than this unless you go for a 100% whole grain loaf!
DanAyo"s recent post prompted a response by Trevor Wilson. http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/56018/acedic-vs-lactic-flavor So time to give this a shot, see if I could do a long warm fermentation such as Trevor suggested without the dough degrading and see what effect it has on flavour. Sunday morning:  Refresh my mother starter (basically a 1:2:3)  which lives in the fridge. Sunday evening: Refresh again keeping to this ratio, making a bit more than I required. Trevor's suggestion was  to make a lower hydration dough eg 65% hydration with the stiff levain being only 10% of the total dough weight. 330 g flour 214 g water 6 g salt So Monday morning 7 am I weighed out 55 g stiff levain and added 214 g water.  Then added some of the flour to make a thick slurry before adding the salt and the rest of the flour.  I hand kneaded until I was close to window pane. As I don't have a proofer, I used the microwave to heat a cup of water, then placed the dough container in the microwave with the light on and the door cracked open.  It held the temperature quite happily at about 80 deg F. 1 pm As per instruction, once the dough had doubled at the 6 hour mark, I removed dough and degassed with firm stretch and folds then returned it to the microwave. 3 pm  repeated the degassing and stretch and folds, did a fairly firm preshape, and returned the dough to the microwave for 60 minutes. 4 pm The dough had puffed up again so degassed again, shaped firmly into a boule and left to proof.  Pre heated oven and DO. 5:30 pm I think dough is ready to bake, but as dough is warm, instead of scoring I snipped a square shape the baked in DO lid on, fan on at 230 deg C for 15 minutes, 15 minutes lid off. Crumb shot The flavour was definitely mild, crumb is soft and close but it is not dense. I was happy the dough did not degrade and I think I could probably have left the first bulk ferment a bit longer, it had doubled but was no where near tripling.  The second rise was quicker and it did more than double.  Shaping was not difficult and the dough although warm was not sticky.  It was fun to try something different and  I will try again I think. While all this was going on, I repeated last week's bake of 25% wholewheat loaves comparing the 2 grains.  This bake was better than last week I think.  When I mixed the levain on Sunday evening I added the bran to the mix to help soften it. South Island wheat (780 g loaf) Crumb North Island wheat (900 g loaf) Crumb Not much between them I reckon.  I think too, adding bran to one of the levain builds is really upping the activity. This is a rewrite - tried last night but the gremlins got me, and I lost the whole post.....  :( Leslie
Hubby went through the weekend loaf in no time and there is no bread in the freezer so I needed to do a mid week bake. I based this bake on Edo Bread’s Small Daily Loaves which is basically a 1:2:3 type of loaf. http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/56031/small-daily-loaves I don’t have exact amounts for the rye Red Fife mix because my scale was misbehaving and what I thought was equal amounts turned out to be more rye than Red Fife. My fault as I didn’t have the scale on a level surface. Then I had more sifted flour than the planned 200 g so I just threw it all in the loaf and reduced the amount of bread flour. So that explains the weird amounts. Makes one loaf. 267 g of a mix of freshly milled Rye and Red Fife flour, sifted 100 g AP Unbleached flour 83 g Bread flour 325 g Water 15 g yogurt 11 g Salt 150 g 100% hydration Wholewheat levain I got amazing oven spring! I got amazing crumb! I also got an amazingly stuck loaf!! 🙄
My sister recently bought a house in Portugal. That got me interested in Portuguese breads and I discovered their treasure trove of breads. For the next few weeks I will be baking breads from that little sunny land and aided by Miguel Forte's blog on Portuguese breads.  Bolo do Caco is from the Islands of Madeira. They are made with a sourdough starter and contains sweet potato. Traditionally baked on a slab over an open fire, mine was cooked in a dry skillet on the stove over a very low heat. Soft and moist inside, probably due to the sweet potato. Tradition in this house demands that the first roll/slice of a fresh bread is eaten warm with heaps of butter.
I've found the more I bake the more I realise what I don't know - like with everything in life... After a number of bakes where I lacked oven spring and experimented with different flours...I've been given some brilliant advice to  go back to lower hydration and see what happens....So I tried Trevor's 65% hydration loaf but WITHOUT THE OVERNIGHT premix as I know that this totally degrades my weak UK flour from the Champlain bakes. http://www.breadwerx.com/how-to-get-open-crumb-from-stiff-dough-video/ I also used my 60% hydration stiff starter which I started to use in the now getting warmer spring weather on the counter and feed every 12 hours.. Overall, I am happy and it did not the quickly 'sagging' during scoring so I am hopeful and shall up hydration slowly and see at what hydration point the 'sagging' happens. Could of course be my 'bad' handling or 'overproofing' or 'scoring'...ha, ha...so many possibilities..... I think, I might bake this more as a great day to day sandwich bread..... If anybody else has the 'slightly sagging' dilemma combined with 'oven spring but not just enough syndrome' and their findings would be great? I think the result of this lower hydration loaves makes me feel it is the hydration that I need to watch and flours.... Kat
At the one of the local bulk stores, I came across some barley flakes. I had been wanting to try barley based on Ian’s porridge breads so barley flakes came home with me. I love cranberries (as if you didn’t know by now) so cranberries were something that needed to be added. Searching TFL for a fruit/barley recipe, I came across a recipe from 2014 by Emkay: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/39217/so-many-apricots-and-barley-porridge-apricot-bread. It was very helpful in creating this recipe.  Then I found my rosemary cranberry pecan crisp recipe and though why not: Rosemary and seeds too! The rosemary can be omitted but I know it gives an amazing flavour to the crackers but I also know that a little goes a long way. So here goes: Makes 3 loaves (Note that I make 4 batches at once so some pictures will show this) Soaker: 90 g barley flakes 180 g boiling water 30 g yogurt Add-ins: 100 g dried cranberries 50 g pumpkins seeds 50 g sunflower seeds 20 g sesame seeds 1 1/4 tsp finely chopped fresh rosemary Dough: 660 g unbleached flour 220 g freshly milled Selkirk wheat flour (255 g Selkirk berries) 110 g freshly milled rye flour (127 g rye berries) 7 g vwg 50 g fresh ground flax seeds 715 g water 22 g salt 245 g levain (Explanation follows) A night or two before: The night before: Dough: Baking: The dough felt really silky as I was doing the folds. I don’t know if it was the barley or what but it was nice! I also like using no flour on the counter when I turn out my dough and rounding using only the dough scraper. This is only the second time I have tried this and it sure makes a lot less mess. I still get a bit of dough on my fingers but nothing like usual. In the end, they turned out quite nicely with decent oven spring. Crumb shot when we cut one open.
made whole dinner in wood fired oven, it’s a little chilly here in New Jersey but I’m tired of waiting for nice weather. Wish my neighbors would take advantage of the oven..
Okay, the grain bill was different than Hamelman's but the rest of the bread was per the formula.  Good stuff! Paul
Beth Hensperger's Sweet Vanilla Challah, to be precise.  These will be appreciation gifts. Paul
For high hydration levains, I've exclusivly used a 125% hydration rye levain for more than a year now, but wanted to return to from whence it came.  This is another Vermont SD, retuning to Mr. Hamelman's 125% hydration AP flour levain formula.  It is just a lovely Pain au Levain bread.  Thin crisp crust and open sweet and "sparkling" crumb. I usually avoid reposting past breads except when something has changed.  I've been mostly quiet here for a while now, and when I bake I generally stick to the tried and true.  But I thought I'd post these just for the heck of it. 3 x 360g, 1 x 410g baguettes/long batards alan
Ha, Ha....this time I created a 100% leaven from my 60% stiff starter and used it after 5 hours...didn't float and not rise that much and expected a flop but rise it did!!! So...next experiment will be to up the hydration a bit more and to see whether my flour and my handling can cope!
You might have noticed you've been getting a ton of emails recently from companies that "care about your privacy". That is because there are new data privacy regulations coming into effect in less than a month that impact anyone doing business with EU citizens. I'm still getting a handle on what they mean and whether what TFL does constitutes "doing business" with anyone, but at the least it is a good time for some housecleaning here. Today I started purging old accounts that never activated. There is no reason to retain anything about any of those accounts. After that I'll purge old accounts that haven't been active in a long time. Next it sounds like it makes sense for me to add a new Terms & Conditions screen that folks will need to acknowledge when they sign up or sign in. The GDPR states that site owners need to have a record of such a thing. And the T&C language needs to be understandable rather than in legelese, which is good. So I am working on putting that together. After the T&C has been up and active site members have had a chance to opt-in, I can remove accounts that don't opt in. I don't want to retain anyone's info who isn't consciously OK with sharing it here. I think I can also give people the permission to delete their own accounts and information, which is also part of the GDPR. To be clear, I never sell, rent, share, or do anything with anyone's email address or any other personal information that is held here (and I wonder: does the kind of mixer or thermometer you use count as personally identifiable information?). Email addresses are used, at sign up, to verify that there is a human at the other end of the line and thus to cut down on the number of spam accounts that get created. After that, email is used for private messages between site members or to receive comment notifications, both of which you can opt out of. A handful of times a year I look up a user's email address and contact them directly, typically either because a site member asks me to get in touch with them and doesn't want to use the PM system or I have a concern about their conduct or content of a post. Your info here is not being shared or used for marketing purposes, and I put a great deal of effort to keep the site and server secure so it can't be accessed or misused.
(Suggestions: 1. all dark rye: extra light and fluffy pancakes 2. 40/15 buckwheat/dark rye: strong buckwheat aroma without a dry and sandy texture 3. 15 g unsweetened cocoa with 45 g flour: chocolate pancakes)
Another batch of Vermont SD, ho-hum.  However this time I decided to score these differently as well as some pre-shaping changes and a more gentle final shaping.  Which I'll attribute to the shorter and slightly stubbier look of these In the spirit of Abel's Ziggy scoring, which I've done  few times now - I decided to try a cross cut, "x's" all down the length of the dough.  And wound up with two distinct looks. On the first two baguettes, I used a ceramic blade but didn't like the drag.  So I switched to my regular curved lame razor blade for the final two.  And I like the results much better. Playing with my food is fun! In both of these pictures, the two on the left were with the ceramic blade and the two on the right with the razor blade. 380g x 4 baguettes/long batards. alan
Mixed some flours available at home and came up with the recipe above. Built a 125% hydration rye levain for about 4 hours. Autolysed the dough flour and water for about 40 minutes, and then mixed the levain except the salt. Kneaded for 2 minutes and after 30 min applied the first stretch and fold, adding salt. Applied three more stretches and folds every 30 min apart until the dough was fermented (air bubbles on the side). Shaped into a boule-batard, proofed for 15 min and shoved it into the fridge for 3 hours cold proof. Baked straight out of the fridge on a preheated pot at 230 C for 25 min with lid on + 10 min with lid off. Below is a picture of the crumb, which turned out quite airy.I observed that fermentation was a little faster than normal, since the amount of salt used was not much, and the amount of fermented flour was also higher than I normally use.
This is my second attempt at both barley flour and sprouted white wheat flour. I’ve wanted to retry working with barley flour since my failed first try. After Ian posted his Guinness Rye Barley Wild Rice Bread, I decided that I’d be brave and incorporate barley into my bread again. 30/30 Freshly Milled Barley/Sprouted White Wheat Sourdough Dough flour: 90g       30%      Freshly milled pearl barley flour (since I can’t get whole) 90g       30%      Freshly milled sprouted white wheat flour 120g      40%      Whole red wheat flour For leaven: 13g        4%      Starter 13g        4%      Bran shifted out from dough flour 13g        4%      Whey For dough: 287g      96%      Dough flour excluding bran for leaven 280g      93%      Whey 39g       13%      Leaven 10g        3%      Vital Wheat Gluten 6g          2%      Salt ____________ 216.5g     71%     Whole grain 299.5g     98%     Total hydration Shift out the coarse bran from the dough flour, reserve 13g for leaven. Mix the rest back into the dough flour or soak them in equal amount of whey taken from dough ingredients for a minimum of 4 hours. Combine all leaven ingredients and let sit until doubled, about 7 hours. Roughly combine all dough ingredients and let ferment overnight for 12 hours. At the 10 hour point, the dough didn’t rise much so I let it ferment for 2 more hours. The dough still felt very firm even after that but I took it out of the bowl anyway.   Immediately I freaked out as the gluten was very poorly developed and the strands were very short and kept breaking. I calmed down and stretched and folded it for a couple of times. The dough became slightly more elastic but it’s still nothing close to other dough I’ve worked with before. Therefore, I stretched and folded it again after letting it rest for 20 minutes. It was allowed to rest for another 20 minutes before the third set of stretch and fold followed by a 30 minute rest. The dough was shaped after the last set of stretch and fold (so 4 in total) and let rise in the proofing basket. At the same time, the oven was preheated at 250°C/480°. The dough didn’t really rise after 40 minutes so I decided to wait for longer. Nevertheless, the dough still felt firm after 75 minutes which was very unusual as the dough is normally 80% proofed after 30 minutes at this very warm temperature. I scored the dough anyway and bake at 250°C/480°F with steam for 15 minutes then without steam for 20 minutes more until the internal temperature reaches a minimum of 205°F. Let cool for at least 3 hours before slicing. There was little oven spring but to my surprise, the dough rose upward rather than spread out. The bread is flatter than most of my other bread but at least it looks like a loaf of bread rather than a pancake brick. The bread actually came out much better than I expected. When I cut it open, I know the bread was very over-proofed though it felt very firm before entering into the oven. However, the crumb is not that close and dense when considering the firmness of the dough. The crust didn’t brown very well but it is thin and crisp. Huge holes: an obvious sign of over-proofing Despite the closeness of the crumb, the bread is very moist and still kind of light. The taste is exceptional for bread this plain (any bread tastes better with nuts or cheese in my opinion). I kept it very simple as I really want to taste the barley and sprouted white wheat. This has really paid off as the nuttiness and freshness of the grains really shine. I’m not sure exactly what contributed to the performance of this bread so any comments regarding it are welcome!
Since my previous post I've taken a number of steps to clean up the site and reduce the amount of personal information stored here. Most notably, just by removing accounts that never activated or activated but never posted and haven't logged in in years, I was able to shrink the user database by over 75% (!). That is a change that you won't really notice, of course, because those accounts were by definition ones that hadn't made an impact, but it makes me feel much better about the amount of personal information I have stored here. Other changes, changes you will (or may) notice: I'm still figuring out how best to deal with accounts that have been idle for a long time that posted content of value to the community. I may try to contact them to get an explicit opt-in. Or I could remove their email addresses from the accounts, which I believe are the only personal information I have about them. Or I could close the accounts and associate their content with the "Anonymous baker" user. I'm not sure what makes the most sense yet, just that I want to respect people's privacy and honour current regulations regarding people's personal information while not losing the tremendous public resource we've built collectively over the years here.
So, as a college student, it's oftentimes hard to bake consistently. Especially considering I pretty much only bake long-fermented sourdough breads. Things have been pretty busy, so I hadn't baked for a while. I decided I'd like to try tweaking around my timing to see if I can possibly fit in baking easier to my schedule. I'd bought a jar of olives to snack on, and saw my starter as I was putting it into my fridge -- an idea formed in my mind. I decided to make my ordinary sourdough bread, only with the addition of kalamata olives. Instead of doing an overnight levain, mixing in the morning, and baking it off in the evening, I'd try starting the day before, retarding the bulk ferment overnight, and then dividing, shaping, and proofing in the morning for a mid-day bake. It came out wonderfully: It I'm definitely out of practice -- shaping didn't go all that well and the crumb is tighter than I'd like it to be. But, the flavor is exquisite -- slightly tangy, wheaty, sweet, and with a hint of olive. The crust is thin and crispy, and the crumb has a great texture  -- not too chewy, not too soft. My normal baking schedule is something like this: Friday 7:00pm -- mix levain Saturday 7:00am -- begin autolyse Saturday 8:30am -- mix dough Saturday morning -- 4-6 turns, ~45 minutes apart Saturday 1:00pm -- divide + preshape Saturday 1:30pm -- shape Saturday 4:30pm -- preheat oven Saturday 5:30pm -- bake This time, I did something completely different: Friday 9:20am -- mix levain and begin autolyse Friday 1:30pm -- mix dough Friday afternoon -- 3 turns, ~50 minutes apart Friday 7:00pm -- put dough in fridge Saturday 7:00am -- take out dough Saturday 8:00am -- divide + preshape Saturday 8:30am -- shape Saturday 11:30am -- preheat oven Saturday 12:30pm -- bake It was a pleasure to work with dough again -- I'd really been missing it. Sure, this dough is quite wet, but it is a soft, extensible dough that is amazing to use. I forgot to scale it down from baking for my family, so I made 2kg of dough, enough for 3 loaves. ----- Overall Dough Characteristics: Whole wheat flour -- 167g / 15% White flour -- 944g / 85% Water -- 880g / 79% Salt -- 22g / 2% Kalamata olives -- 165g / 15% (Prefermented flour -- 111g / 10% -- whole wheat) --- Levain: Whole wheat flour -- 94g / 100% Water -- 100g / 106% 60% hydration starter -- 28g / 30% --- Final mix: White flour -- 944g / 93% Whole wheat flour -- 73g / 7% Water -- 780g / 77% Levain -- 222g / 22% Salt -- 22g / 2% Kalamata Olives -- 165g / 16% --- The water is an estimate because I added a bit extra to make it behave more like I wanted it to. My standard sourdough is 78% hydration, but I bumped this up closer to 80%.
Made a decent and straight forward white wheat sourdough today. Never had a crust crackle as loud and as long as this one did once pulled from the oven. It's went well with oil and balsamic.
I wanted to have a go at making a porridge bread using Bob's Red Mill 6 grain + flaxseed hot cereal mix.  I added some barley flakes and some wholewheat flour, freshly milled. Levain: 86 g @ 100% hydration built the day before, with the final build having some bran included. It was left to mature overnight. Porridge mix:  I wasn't sure about this so I weighed out 54 g cereal mix (20%), 13 g barley flakes (5%) and added 70 g water then cooked it gently.  Straight away I realised I had insufficient water so bit by bit I added water, maybe 30 g but some was lost during cooking. At the end I had 162 cooked porridge. Allowed it to cool. Mixed the main dough: 202 g bread flour (90%), 27 g wholewheat flour 10% - bran removed and used in levain and 84 g water.  It wasn't enough water so I added another 40 g water and left it for 30 minutes to autolyse. The dough was very firm.  Then added 4.9g salt, 10 g yoghurt and 86 g levain and hand mixed and did a few slap and folds etc until well incorporated.  30 minutes later did 1 set of stretch and folds, adding another 10 g water. Then another 2 sets of stretch and folds before leaving to bulk ferment.  After about 4 hours I preshaped, left for 45 minutes, shaped and popped it in the fridge overnight Baked next morning 240 deg C for 15 minutes in DO lid on and 15 minutes lid off. and the crumb shot. The crumb is tender, flavour is good.  First time in a long time that I have added the yoghurt and I am happy with the outcome.  I set out to make this without a known recipe so really winged it.  I need to go back and recalculate my bakers % as they have changed with the additions.  I will make this again, maybe tweak it a bit not so far so good. At the same time that this bread was bulk fermenting I had Teresa Greenway's Potato Water Blister Crust SD underway.  I love it and the double hydration technique works well. The crumb is lovely - a delicious bread I was on a roll, most of it planned. The next 2 loaves were 1:2:3 loaves with 15% freshly milled rye.  One had a firm starter @ 65% hydration and the other a liquid starter at 100% hydration.  Both loaves were mixed, 30 minute autolyse, salt and levain added - slap and fold until incorporated, then 3 sets of stretch and folds at 30 minute intervals.  Bulk ferment was 3.5 hours for the 100% hydration starter, and 4 hours for the firm starter.  Doughs were easy to manage and after shaping were retarded overnight. Baked at 240 deg C for 15 minutes lid on my DO, 15 minutes lid off.  My objective with this bake was to see if there was an obvious effect from the starter. 100% hydration loaf (850 g) 65% hydration loaf (550 g) So I find that the 100% starter gave a slightly more open, lighter loaf - interesting.  It also bulk fermented quicker.  So although I keep my starter as a 65% STARTER in the fridge, I will continue to build a 100% hydration starter for my breads. Now for the last bake of the day.  I looked at my container of left over milled flour in the fridge and thought I should use it up.  So I mixed up a 100% levain first thing in the morning using what was left over from the night before.  I popped it in the microwave at 80 deg F and it was ready when i wanted to mix things up. Flour mix - 187 g of milled, stored spelt, rye and wholewheat and I have no idea of ratios.  I added enough white flour to make the loaf using 250 g so it was 25% white flour.  Just a straight 1:2:3 again.  I was treated as the others and it was the last to proof.  It had a good 12 - 13 hours in the fridge.  I shaped it as a boule and this is what came out. and here is a crumb shot. I am happy with it, it was a total unknown.  Have frozen it so will try it out some time during the week but although it is a little flat, the crumb is ok I think for a 75% whole grain loaf. It was a marathon day, but as I mixed things one after the other, provided it wrote times down, it worked well and mixes were about 15 minutes apart and stretch and folds 30 minutes so it all coincided most of the time.  The bulk ferments just happened one at a time and there was no drama. I kept my hydrations around 70 - 72% and the dough was good to handle.  Some lessons learnt! A good day. Leslie PS sorry about the photos, don't know how to re orientate them as they were taken with my Samsung phone rather than my ipad.
Pao de Figo. Another Portuguese bread. The filling is made by slowly cooking dried figs and fresh rosemary in port wine. You roll out the dough and spread the filling on half. Fold the other half over, cut into strips, twist and braid. The braid is formed into a circle and left to rise. But the recipe did not specify the amount of water to use. I started with half a cup and it was a bit too dry. I added another quarter cup, which was too much. The dough was a bit too soft and it collapsed in the oven. It looked like the sultan was in a hurry when he put on his turban in the morning. Oh well, it is still very good with a strong cheddar. Recipe here: http://portuguesebreads.blogspot.com.au/2016/12/pao-de-figo.html
Great bake wood fire oven
This is a bread with a good taste and aroma. The composition of the test includes three types of flour: rye wholemeal, wheat whole-grain, wheat breads flour. In addition to this are added fried flax seeds. The dough includes gum. All together gives an amazing taste and aroma.
I decided to try a 50% whole grain mix of several of the grains I had on hand, and ended up with:    • Red wheat    • White wheat    • Rye    • Spelt    • Kamut    • Emmer I also made a room temp soaker with equal parts flax and toasted sunflower and sesame seeds.  I also used honey and my faux red rye malt.  I sifted the whole grains and used the hard bits in the levain.  It stood up to a 29-hour cold final rise.  I’ve never done a mix of so many grains. It’s noticeably more flavorful than usual, and I couldn't be more pleased.  The dough handled about the same as normal for the Hamelman 50/50 WW recipe this is based on. My oven as usual is hotter than the dial reads, and these only took 30 minutes at "450 F."
This is a repeat of Trevor’s European Peasant Bread (with the substitution of Kamut instead of wholewheat) while implementing Dabrownman’s suggestions: “I would do three different things with the levain build.  I would first get the starter amount up to 15 g from 10g.  Then get all the bran into the first feeding of the levain all 35g so it is in the acid the max amount of time and go to a 2 stage levain build with the first stage being 4 hours and the 2nd stage 8 hours.  Then I would use the high extraction flour from the whole grain for the 2nd stage of the levain rather than the unbleached white flour.“ My levain builds were longer than suggested but I did follow the rest. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves 150 g freshly milled spelt 150 g freshly milled rye 150 g freshly milled Kamut flour 820 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax 850 g filtered water 23 g Himalayan pink salt 30 g local yogurt 280 g 100% hydration levain (procedure for this is in recipe) Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Main dough: Once again, I got great oven spring. It is amazing how much a loaf springs up when there are no add-ins in it and only 35% whole grains.
made these flat breads today..not real happy with the crust. Think I’ll use some starter next time. Wanted a blistered chewy base. These were crunchy. Any suggestions?
20% Sprouted Spelt Sun-dried Tomatoes Cheddar Sourdough Dough flour: 150g     50%       Whole wheat flour 90g       30%       Whole spelt flour 60g       20%       Freshly milled sprouted spelt flour For leaven: 10g       3.3%      Starter 10g       3.3%      Bran shifted out from dough flour 10g       3.3%      Water For dough: 290g     96.7%      Dough flour excluding bran for leaven 265g     88.3%      Water 30g         10%      Leaven 9g             3%      Vital Wheat Gluten 3g             1%      Dark barley malt powder 5g        1.67%      Salt Add-ins: 34g       11.3%     Sun-dried tomatoes 90g         30%      Smoked cheddar cheese ___________ 305g       100%     Whole grain 280g      91.8%     Total hydration Shift out the coarse bran from the dough flour, reserve 10g for leaven. Mix the rest back into the dough flour or soak them in equal amount of water taken from dough ingredients for a minimum of 4 hours. Combine all leaven ingredients and let sit until doubled, about 8 hours. Roughly combine all dough ingredients and let ferment until ready. My leaven wasn’t ready when I use it so the dough took 16 hours to double. This leads to degradation of dough structure as the excessive activity of protease broke down the gluten. The bulk fermentation should take less than 10 hours if the starter is ripe and this problem should not occur. Fold in the smoked cheddar and sun-dried tomatoes and let the dough rest for 20 minutes. Construct 3 sets of stretch and fold over a 1.25 hour proofing period (20+30+25), shape the dough after the last set of stretch and fold and let rise untouched for 25 minutes (part of the 1.25 hour). At the same time, preheat the oven at 250°C/480°F and pre-steam at the last ten minutes. Score the dough and bake at 250°C/480°F with steam for 15 minutes then without steam for 20 minutes more or until the internal temperature reaches a minimum of 205°F. Let cool for at least 3 hours before slicing. The gluten broke down leads to poor dough structure that couldn’t support itself. The dough thus flattened out immediately when put into the oven. However, there was still some oven spring and the crumb wasn’t too bad. It is very moist and chewy: just the way I like it.  Shuuu… I’ll just tell my mom that it’s flatbread when I serve it to her! As for the taste, there’re no words…They are so delicious! Of course, you can hardly go wrong with sun-dried tomatoes and cheese but the sprouted spelt added something special too. I’d be lying if I tell you I can taste strong sprouted spelt flavour. Yet it is what that takes this bread from tasty to phenomenal. _________ I took some extra dough and made it into pizza. It turned out to be the best decision ever! Spread with home-made tomato relish. Half with feta cheese and half with smoked cheddar (my mom can’t stand goat’s cheese), topped with caramelized cabbage. Crispy bottom and crust with a chewy centre! Have you tried cabbage on pizza? Just slice them thinly and put them on top of everything of the dough raw. It’ll come out of the oven perfectly caramelized!
It's that time of year again for grilled burgers which demand some tasty buns like these! Fresh milled durum and whole wheat with some Caputo 00 style flour and sweet potato made the perfect soft and flavorful burger bun. Download the BreadStorm File Here. Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I usually do this the night before.  Use immediately or refrigerate for up to 2 days. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours,  and 400 grams of the water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 30 minutes or longer.   Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), sweet potatoes, olive oil and balance of the water, and mix on low for 5 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (If you have a proofer you can set it to 78 degrees and follow above steps but you should be finished in 1 hour to 1.5 hours). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 hours.  Remove the dough and shape into rolls (for burgers I usually weight the dough to 145-155 grams).   Place the shaped rolls on a cookie sheet sprayed with cooking spray or use some parchment paper and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 450 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone above the pan.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the rolls in the oven. Let them bake for around 20 minutes until they are nice and brown. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before eating.
She's got a gray face now but she is still pretty spry for her age!
An old friend, Field Blend #2.  But with a new twist.  I recently returned to Mr. Hamelman's all AP 125% hydration levain (from my all rye version of it) and had a hankering to combine this with Mr. Forkish's FB#2 formula.  A Hamelkish or Forkelman Frankenstein. Aside from using the all AP levain, I dropped the overall hydration down from 78% to a more Hamelman-like top-of-range of about 73%.  All other percentages and flour mixes were adhered to, including the pre-fermented flour percentage.  Due to the addition of the levain at "autolyse" time, I shortened the bulk rise by that same half hour as the autolyse.  Then my standard bulk retard and ... A very recent change to my pre-shaping and final shaping is a work-in-progress.  Trying to be ever more gentle, I'm still working on getting a consistent shaping.  Not complaining, you understand, just explaining a thing or two. 375g x 4 baguettes / long batards And why do I call these long batards as well?  I'm so glad you asked.  Last year I was made aware of a page from Msr. Calvel's book which portrays differing bread shapes, weights, sizes and scores.  And so I changed my tune and adapted to both. And as long as open crumb was mentioned, here are slices of the two breads I've made using this softer, gentler approach to shaping. The two on the left are from a deli rye and the two on the right are from this FrankenBread (FB#2).  Both are at 73% hydration. alan
A fond adieu to Portugal with this light semolina loaf, pao Alentejo, from Nelson Carvalheiro's recipe. It starts off with two different starters, one made with bread flour and one with rye. Left them overnight to bubble and mixed the bread the next morning. I got busy in the garden, so it overproofed a bit. I gently knocked it down and shaped the loaf according to Berndt's method and let it rise in a bowl lined with well-floured cheesecloth. It all worked well except that I could not get the required ridge when it baked. I probably did not flour the end of the roll enough before putting it down to rise. It is one of the nicest tasting breads I have ever baked. I will make it again and keep on trying to get the right ride along the loaf.
It started with an Einkorn Poolish.  What was I thinking?   Should drink my morning coffee first before doing this.  Desperate to try out my new crown cane banneton, threw the last of my Einkorn flour onto the scale, 138 grams.  Matched that with equal weights of water. Whoops! A tad too much, no biggie, Einkorn loves to soak up water if given the time and gee whiz, only 10 extra grams.  Then found a 7 g package of instant yeast, tore open and tapped in a gram or two saving the rest for later.  Stir, cover and forget for the rest of the morning while I enjoy my coffee and get into my day. As I poked and prodded my Einkorn Poolish over the course of the morning, it reminded me just how sticky Einkorn dough can be.  I hope it works out.  I slipped a small hot freshly peeled boiled potato into the bowl, along the side, warm things up a bit around 10 am.   Rising nicely and doubling which it doesn't have to do but looks like an afternoon bake.  Around noon, grated the potatoes and stirred it into the poolish.  What a mess to clean the spoon! Around 2 pm I did my maths.  Let's see....  at least 750g dough.  A two-three water to flour recipe would be 300g H2O to 450g flour.... subtract the poolish and get my water and flour weights for 66.6% hydration.  Add the potatoe and it should be in the 500g range for figuring 2% salt.  (Used 8g table salt.)   I decided on AP flour, no bread flour in cupboard.  Hey, did discover I had two kinds of spelt flour from the same manufacturer, one sifted "white" and the other whole flour.  The carb. and fiber contents are very different. Two o'clock mixed up the dough with rest yeast and after half an hour rest, used wet hands to knead shaggy dough into smooth dough. Still sticking and wondering if the dividing and shaping will be just as sticky.  After another half hour of sitting, turned out onto a lightly AP floured bench and no problem dividing with a bench scraper as long as the cut edges got a little flour on them in the process.  Six balls at  approx 120g each and one seventh ball with 145g.  That's how it came out from original instructions of 100g each with one at 150g.  20 min rest under a damp towel.  Rolling out large ball into a disk, draping well floured banneton, reshaping other balls and spacing around middle.  Cutting hump into a 6 point star and pressing points onto each ball to secure.  Dusted a little bit around the edges with raw sesame seeds.  Let proof under damp towel on rack.  Oven 220° C with steam pan baked on heavy pre-heated pizza pan.  Fine soft crumb with a crusty yummy loaf. Reflecting back on flattening and draping the heavier dough ball,  it could have been a smaller disk with less dough spread out at the bottom of the banneton.  Seeds would have to be rolled into outside surface before draping.   You can see I almost covered the bottom.  There is so little room at the bottom of this banneton.  Not sure if I like the looks of the cane lines as compared to a smooth cloth lined form at the Wild Yeast Blog http://www.wildyeastblog.com/shape-crown-couronne/?style=print
Yep...I am still  learning to bake this formula trying different stiff or wet starters and also have been a bit more scientific in measuring the amount of rise....so on this one I really 'focused' and only let it go to 30% with that domed look as well as bubbles and activity....and then straight in to the fridge for 12 hours at 5 - 3 C.... I love to get a 'balanced' looking loaf at the moment with good oven rise, crumb, crust and ears....(but boy would I love a 'big' ear!!! I also tried the 'water trick' to see whether I get that 'darker look' with blisters... AND I also tried to shape tighter in final shaping to avoid 'sagging' of loaf.... The mantra is...and applies to everything in life really... Don't think about the person you want to be think about the person you actually are... You have to be honest where you're at to work through your barriers to be limitless.... Matt Kahn
Abe posted this bread, it looked great, and because hubby is Swiss I just had to have a go.  I used my existing Raspberry yeast water instead of building a new raisin yest water as in the recipe. Monday afternoon, I removed the yeast water from its hibernation in the fridge, strained off the old fruit and replenished it with a a few raspberries still lingering on the plants, a bit of orange peel, a few raisins and some more water.  I sat the jar in a bowl of warm water and watched it.  Aha.. its fizzing, now I can proceed.  I scaled the recipe Abe gave me, it has 2 stage build of a YW preferrment Build 1 Bread flour 64 g + 41 g raspberry YW. Mixed at 10 pm and left on bench overnight. Build 2 Add to Build 1, 81 g bread flour + 38 g freshly milled wholewheat flour + 75 g water.  I mixed all together at 8:30 am and warmed up microwave to about 82 deg F and placed bowl there.  Recipe said 12 - 14 hours, but it was more than doubled and beautifully domed by 1:30 pm.  (Maybe I should have left it at room temp but I thought if I am lucky I can bake today) Final Dough mixed at 1:30 pm All of build 2 = 194 g bread flour + 6 g gluten flour + 6.9 g salt + 153 g water.  I mixed this all together by hand, a few slap and folds, a few stretch and folds until well incorporated.  Then I flattened dough out and spread over 57 g raisins and 84 g chopped pecan nuts (I do not like walnuts which is what recipe called for) then folded dough and slowly incorporated them into the dough.  Left it to sit for just over half an hour then did another 2 stretch and folds and left to ferment. 4:15 pm I thought, ok time to preshape.  So formed a reasonably tight batard and left it to rest for 45 minutes, before patting out gently into a rectangle and reforming the batard.  Preheated the oven to 450 deg F and DO 6:30 pm all was looking good so unmould dough, slashed and placed in DO and into preheated oven at 450 deg F for 15 minutes lid on, 15 minutes lid off. Left to cool for several hours before slicing and freezing.  But of course we had to sample it and OMG - it is absolutely scrumptious - will DEFINITELY make this again, and again!! thanks Abe - it is very yum indeed. Leslie
Well I have never used Kamut and managed to find a 400 g packet at a local organic store - it was very pricey! I milled the kamut and very quickly found it was different to rye spelt or wholewheat and it jammed my mill very quickly.  Panic!! hubby managed to free it up and after I removed the berry causing the issue, I carefully carried on, only to do it again.  This time I could fix it, but proceed very carefully and slowly feeding it through.   I made 2 x 350 gram boules so it is not a big bake.  I have learnt a few things for the next bake. The recipe has a very  small amount of prefermented flour and a long slow fermentation.  I had refreshed my stiff starter during the morning and mid afternoon built a 100% hydration version. 8 pm mixed together all ingredients and leave overnight to ferment.  Dough was soft but firm and I had the feeling maybe I should have added more water, but as I have heard kamut ferments quickly, I thought just do as recipe says this time. Next morning there are tiny bubbles in dough but very little increase in volume so as I had microwave warmed up for the Swiss farmhouse yeast water build, I put the container in there.  By midday it had risen perhaps 50% so I preshaped and left a full hour. 1:15 pm I did final shape and placed two boules in bowls back in microwave.  I did finger poke and thought yep, there is more volume, not huge but.. ok time to bake. Baked in DO 250 deg F for 15 mins lid on, 15 minutes lid off.  One of these I scored, the other I left to open on seam line. Well, not much oven spring, they feel heavy and they are not as big as a SD boule the same weight.  Maybe more water would have helped and perhaps I needed a bigger % prefermented flour, and more patience. Will cut one of these tomorrow.  I am very curious to see how the crumb is and how the flavour is. Leslie
https://m.facebook.com/story.php?story_fbid=10156269181641727&id=20534666726
Loved this one that Danni had posted  http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/56209/european-peasant-loaf-take-2 So this was the third loaf that I made this week.  I scaled Danni's formula down as I only wanted to make one loaf. Monday: refreshed starter and then built 100% levain and left to ripen.  8 pm built the final levain for dough using all bran I had sifted out plus some flour to give me enough flour and left at room temperature overnight Tuesday: 12:20 pm mixed together flours and water and left to autolyse for 1 hour 40 g breadflour + 40 g spelt freshly milled + 40 g freshly milled rye + 40 g wholewheat freshly milled (not willing to try a second kamut loaf until I had seen the result of my first try) + 3 g gluten + 222 water + 12.6 g ground flax seed. 13:30 pm mix final dough 6 g salt + 8 g yoghurt + 219 g 100% levain.  Was thinking wow this is a lot of levain, but that is what I wrote down, must be correct!  Slap and folds, stretch and folds until all ingredients incorporated then left to rest. At 30 minute intervals did 3 sets of S & f then left to bulk ferment. Wow, this dough is really moving - no way will I get a long BF.  At 4 pm preshape (dough had doubled!!) and at 4:35 final shape. At 5:15 I placed the dough in the refrigerator as I needed oven for dinner. At 6:15 pm placed dough in preheated DO and baked at 450 deg F for 15 minutes lid on, 15 minutes lid off. I went back and looked at the notes I had made when I copied Danni"s formula and found that whilst I had divided all her ingredients by 3, I had forgotten to do this for the levain so I had a huge proportion of levain - little wonder it took off like a rocket ship!! I think I may have bulk fermented a bit too long but the result is ok, it just spread a bit. Danni - what do you think?   If I had had the correct proportion of levain, the dough may have been a bit firmer? It is sliced and frozen, will see how it is later in the week. Leslie
Hello, I'm new here but I love the fact that we could share our passion around baking! I've baked this loaf with the formula from the book called Sourdough. I followed all the instructions and I think it's very good (as this is one of my first experiments). The flavors are amazing due to the toasted oats that bring sweetness and complexity, the crumb is airy but at the same time very moist, and I think this bread is perfect both for lunch and breakfast! I have one question: I let this loaf ferment for 3 and an half hours at room temperature and then I transferred it into the fridge; but it was fermenting at an high pace so at one point I decided to bake it even if it has only 5 hours of colf proofing. Do you think it is wrong to do so? The speed of the fermentation could have been modified by the presence of the oats?
After a few not-so-successful bake, I decided to cheer myself up with a loaf of golden sourdough bread. To be exact, it’s quintuple (aka five times) positive energy sourdough. So how does it add up to five? I’ll count it for you. Cornmeal Masa harina Turmeric Golden tea leaves Toasted white sesame seeds See? I didn’t lie to you! Quintuple Golden Sourdough Dough flour: 150g      60%       Whole wheat flour 60g        20%       Whole Spelt flour 60g        20%       Masa Harina For leaven: 10g       3.3%       Starter 10g       3.3%       Bran shifted out from dough flour 10g       3.3%       Water For porridge: 45g         15%       Medium stone grind cornmeal 135g       45%       Water 0.25g    0.08%       Salt For tea-infused liquid: 217g    72.3%       Water 54g      18.1%       Whey 3g             1%       Kenyan golden pekoe tea leaves For dough: 290g     96.7%      Dough flour excluding bran for leaven 271g     90.3%      Tea-infused liquid 30g          10%      Leaven 9g             3%       Powdered toasted white sesame seeds 9g             3%       Vital Wheat Gluten 5g          1.7%       Salt 3g             1%       Turmeric powder Add-ins: 21g          7%        Toasted white sesame seeds 45g        15%        Raisins ___________ (Excluding the porridge) 305g       100%      Whole grain 286g      93.8%      Total hydration Shift out the coarse bran from the dough flour, reserve 10g for leaven. Mix the rest back into the dough flour or soak them in equal amount of whey taken from dough ingredients for a minimum of 4 hours. Combine all leaven ingredients and let sit until doubled, about 6 hours. Soak the raisins in a little hot water to re-hydrate. Make the porridge. Bring the water to a boil and dissolve a pinch (0.25g) of salt into it. Stir in the cornmeal and keep whisking until no lumps remains. Cover the pot and let stand stove off for 30 minutes. Let the porridge cool to room temperature and refrigerate until needed. Infuse the tea leaves by pouring 30g of hot water over them. Let steep for 20 minutes before pressing the mixture through a sieve to extract as much of the tea essence as possible. Discard the tea leaves. Pour in enough water to measure 217g and combine with the whey. Refrigerate until cold (skip if your kitchen is cool). Reserve 10g of the liquid and roughly combine all dough ingredients except for the leaven and salt. Autolyse for 30 minutes. Combine the reserved liquid with the leaven. Knead it into the dough along with the salt and polenta porridge. Let it ferment for 8 hours (Mind you: my kitchen is 27°C currently). Fold in the sesame seeds and raisins and let the dough rest for 20 minutes. Shape the dough and put in into a proofing basket. Leave it on the counter for 20 minutes then retard for 8 hours. Take the dough out of the fridge and let it rest on the counter for 1 hour. At the same time, preheat the oven at 250°C/480°F and pre-steam at the last ten minutes. Score the dough and bake at 250°C/480°F with steam for 15 minutes then without steam for 25 minutes more or until the internal temperature reaches a minimum of 205°F. Let cool for at least 3 hours before slicing. The crust is extra-crispy thanks to the cornmeal, which gives a nice contrast to the creamy crumb. The oven spring is not as much as I’d hoped for but I’m not too stressed over it since this is just the 2nd time I try retarding the dough. Hopefully, I’ll get a better grasp on the timing after a few more bakes. The crumb’s colour is a stunning yellow even with just 1 tsp of turmeric. I doubt there’s any natural colour that won’t be masked by the pigment of turmeric. As expected, the crumb is rather closely-packed but very moist and creamy due to the incorporation of polenta porridge. The slight under-proofing might also have contributed to that to some extent. Next time, I’ll let the dough proof for 30 minutes instead of 20 minutes before retarding to see if it’d improve the situation. To be honest, the turmeric, tea and corn flavour are rather subtle. Though I already tried to tone down the taste of sesame by using a lower percentage of it, it is still the dominant aroma of this bread. Doubling the tea leaves and halving the sesame might achieve a more balanced profile. Let this golden bread lift your mood up!
The basic ingredients for good bread - flour, salt, water, yeast - are simple yet can produce such a wonderful variety of breads with complex flavours, crumb textures, crusts.  Sometimes in my tinkering and experimenting I need to remind myself that bread made just with these basic ingredients can be really good bread!  So with that in mind, today's bake focused on the basics - good grain, salt, water and yeast. Cracked Grain Porridge Sourdough Bread The cracked grain porridge was gently mixed into the dough after the second of four stretch/folds. After four hours the loaves were pre-shaped, rested for thirty minutes and then shaped and cold proofed overnight for 10 hours. I baked the loaves directly out of the fridge; covered for 25 minutes at 500 F; 10 minutes at 450 F and then uncovered, directly on the baking stone for 20 minutes at 450 F.
Well, thought I give this one a go as I was visiting friends today and they so far have eaten a lot of Champlains!! variation on breadtopia formula with changes as outlined below....ha, ha there is method to my madness or not..... https://breadtopia.com/kamut-sourdough-bread/ 40% Kamut/Khorasan loaf with : 300 g bread flour 200 g whole grain Kamut ( 360 g water 75 g leaven 10g salt (1.5 tsp) 79% hydration without adding more water, 360g plus starter I decided that 'my dough' would need a bit more water and added 10g  water - when adding salt 10g - in bulk container so 83% hydration with leaven counted in..... Leaven built from stiff starter, 1:2:2 , 30:60:60 at 7:30 and in proofer 76F and then put  at 11 AM room temp to slow down.. AL 12:15 – 78Dough temp with 360g warm water in proofer, dough temp 78F 13:30 Add 75g Leaven ONLY  to dough, 75F 1st Rubaud mix, 10 min rest, add salt 10g and 10g water and 2nd Rubaud mix 14: 00 Start Bulk , 10g water in bulk container dough temp75F 15:00 1 S&F dough temp76F 16:00 2 S&F 75F 17:00 3 S & F 77F - coiling 17:30 Pre-Shape – using coiling like Trevor IG https://www.instagram.com/p/BiuReKoHlPS/?hl=en&taken-by=trevorjaywilson and then briefly rounded using bench scraper 18:00 Final Shaping a la Trevor https://www.instagram.com/p/Bi2SOVZnizu/?hl=en&taken-by=trevorjaywilson for proofier dough...and this worked really well but forgot to take photos as this stage....too pre-occupied! straight into fridge which varies from 2C to 5C depending on it's mood Bake straight out of fridge 6:15 following morning ....
Hi bakers! Today I want to share with you my first experience with a loaf made with the "sift and scald" method; here it is the recipe: 150gr whole wheat flour (you have to sift it 12 hours before starting to mix the other ingredients, the bran that remains has to be soaked in 75gr of scalding water 12 hours) 350gr white bread flour 350gr water 10gr salt 100gr leaven (I made mine with 20gr starter, 40gr white bread flour and 40gr water and let it sit overnight) I prepared the soaked bran the night before and in the morning I mixed water and leaven, than flour (both the white and the sifted one) and let it sit covered for 1 hour. I added salt and the soaked bran and worked the dough until all the ingredients were well incorporated; I let it sit for 3 hours and an half for the bulk fermentation and did 4 round of stretch and folds (as this dough was really wet). Than I let it rise until it nearly doubled in volume, and I started the preshape. I let it rest on the bench for 20 minutes after the reshape and than shaped in a boule shape. I put the dough in a proving basket and let it sit at room temperature covered for 1 hour and an half. I then transferred the dough in the fridge for the retarded fermentation until the next morning (circa 18 hours). I baked it with my Lodge: 20 minutes covered and 35 minutes without the lid. I am happy with the result and the crumb but I have to admit that it was very difficult to work with and that the oven spring didn't happen. I think that maybe my bran was less dry than I thought (or it was less in quantity) and I added too much water to it, and than this amount of water (350 for the dough and 75 for the bran) was too much to handle properly (as I am a beginner). Let me know if you had some experience with this method or if you try my formula! Keep baking, Beatrice
Hello friends!
Hi bakers! Today I want to share with you a completely new experiment of mine, a loaf that was in my mind for a long time but I have never had the opportunity to bake it. I tried to create a formula for a slightly sweet bread but I was so scared because of the sugar I had to add: will it speed up the fermentation process? will it ruin the texture of the final result? Those two questions were all I could think of. I decided to give it a go, merging different formulas from the internet and from different books because baking is something that helps me with my anxiety as you have to be precise, gentle, determinate but also emphatic. The ingredients: 115gr chocolate leaven 400gr water 400gr white bread flour 100gr whole wheat flour 40gr cacao 125gr raisins 50gr sugar cinnamon The method is the same as a normal country bread, I added the sugar and cinnamon when I added the salt and the raisins at the first round of stretch and fold during the bulk fermentation. I am really happy with the result, the crumb is open even if there are the raisins and the sugar, the flavors are mild but you can recognize all of them; it is a perfect breakfast bread with some almond butter :) Thanks a lot for reading, grazie! Happy baking, Beatrice!
Quite a while ago, I had saved a number of recipes that CedarMountain had posted and I was looking for inspiration when I came across this one in my recipe app. It sounded intriguing with using a sprouted rye berry, ground toasted millet and flax porridge. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves 210 g rye berries divided into 100 g and 110 g portions 110 g spelt berries 110 g red fife berries 770 g unbleached flour 700 g water (main dough) 50 g flax seeds 60 g millet 205 g of water (for porridge) 30 g full fat yogurt 23 g sea salt 245 g 100% hydration levain (procedure in instructions) Sprouting the rye berries A couple of nights before: The morning before: Before going to bed the night before: Main dough: Baking day:
I do not have much time now to post and have fun in this wonderful community as before because of my classes and training so I am shaking up the format of my posts. :) Before, they are super wordy but now I will keep them short and sweet with maybe just a few pictures.Xuixo (also spelled chuchos but I think xuixos looks way cooler!) is a vienoisserie from Spain. They are made with a yeast-risen dough which may be laminated or not that is filled with crema catalana, rolled into a croissant or baton shape, deep-fried then rolled in sugar. I just learnt them from Gemma Stafford in one of her travel series in Spain and as she said, the xuixo just might be the ancestor of the cronut.I made some for mothers' day and my mom's birthday but I did not have time to post it or even take photos. They were so delicious that I made another batch.The dough was raised with my starter which is lightning fast these days. Already doubled in 2 hours and more than tripled in less than 4 hours. If my bread made from it do not have the tang, I would think that I'm baking with commercial yeast! I laminated it with butter with a single and a double turn.The dough already laminated. I used a vanilla custard for the filling. I shaped them into batons because it is much easier and I overfilled them but I still managed to seal them properly.I fried them them until golden on low flame then rolled them in sugar. I did not have fine or caster sugar but it worked just fine. I accidentally poked a hole on one of them while frying so it leaked and the custard burnt on the surface. Although deep-fried, they were not greasy at all with all of the components in great harmony.I honestly like the neat look of those not rolled in sugar but of course it lacks the extra sweetness and crunch.Soft, light, flaky, crispy but has the body to hold that rich and overflowing custard. ¡Delicioso!
Greeting - been a little while since I posted thanks to being busier than normal but thought I'd drop a snap of a mixed bake - bread and croissants. This sure does challenge your timing skills and this time ended up with really nice crumb on the baguettes but a little overproofed croissants - no big deal - still pretty edible. Having been on hiatus for a bit it's good to see ya'll baking away amd hope to post more often (just got a big flour shipment so should be digging in more regularly)
This recipe was given to me by my late sister in law. Let me know if you try it!
Hi There, I have heard some people bake to discharge the tension and the stress after a week of hard working but this definitely did not happen to me :). In fact I started baking with the idea of saving some money and after lots of failures, I started becoming even more stressed. As any newbie, I had been looking for the best sourdough recipe and none of the ones I tried worked for me. Surely, I told myself, people do not reveal the secrets behind a wonderful loaf nor the most popular books do. The Tartine Bread book and other ooks I read talk about very weird things like "feeling the dough", "watching the dough", "touching the dough" etc. like it was your beloved pet; Are they kidding me? they made me reading hundreds of pages and they didn't even share with me any secret? Probably those readings annoyed me so much that I decided not to follow any recipe and try to find the secrets by myself. It did not take long time to realize I was actually doing the weird things I did not want to believe were actually the best advises i was ever given :) I still have a lot to learn but last results (attached photo) were pretty decent so I decided to share with this blog my recipe ad the method I use with the hope you can maybe improve it even more. I have to say it was impossible to find a 100% spelt sourdough recipe on the Internet. Probably reason being spelt flour is not the best flour to make bread. This is the reason why I actually decided to add 8% Vital Wheat Gluten. The ingredients I use are: The above ingredients give me: The method I use is: There are several things I need to improve I hope you found this post useful, any advice on how to improve any of the points above would be much appreciated. Baking is an experience everyone should do at least once in their life. The only drawback is that you can become addicted and you start eating bread just to have the excuse to bake even more :D Best regards! Stefano
Looks like this fellow Karl de Smedt had the same idea as Alt Altus. I like his name for it better: Fleur de Levain. Happy Baking, Tom
Apparently, these are inspired by Ian aka the King of Buns as referred to by dabrownman. As I can never allow myself to follow a recipe exactly, of course I have changed things up to show my own character. Unlike Ian, who blended the cream cheese with the dough, I put in chunks of cream cheese. Also, candied orange peels and sunflower seeds are incorporated to make the rolls more interesting. Rye flours are usually used along with orange and earl grey, yet to break the tradition, I chose to use barley flour (which resembles more of Ian’s rolls as well). Earl grey cream cheese rolls with orange and sunflower seeds Dough flour: 90g       30%       Freshly milled pearl barley flour 75g       25%       Whole spelt flour 75g       25%       Whole red wheat flour 60g       20%       Freshly milled sprouted white wheat flour For leaven: 10g       3.3%       Starter 13g       4.3%       Bran shifted out from dough flour 13g       4.3%       Water For dough: 287g     95.7%       Dough flour excluding bran for leaven 207g     68.9%       Water 52g       17.3%       Whey 36g         12%        Leaven 9g             3%        Vital Wheat Gluten 5g          1.7%        Salt 1g        0.33%        Ground earl grey tea leaves Add-ins: 90g         30%       Cream cheese (I used 1/3 less fat) 30g         10%       Toasted sunflower seeds 21g           7%       Candied orange peels ___________ 215g       70.5%      Whole grain 277g       90.8%      Total hydration Shift out the coarse bran from the dough flour, reserve 13g for leaven. Mix the rest back into the dough flour or soak them in equal amount of whey taken from dough ingredients for a minimum of 4 hours. Combine all leaven ingredients and let sit until doubled, about 6-8 hours. Soak the candied orange peel in a little hot water to rehydrate. Freeze the cream cheese for 1 hour. Cut into cubes and return to the freezer until needed. Reserve 10g of the liquid and roughly combine all dough ingredients except for the leaven and salt. Autolyse for 30 minutes. Combine the reserved liquid with the leaven. Knead it into the dough along with the salt. Let it ferment for 10 hours. Fold in the sunflower seeds and orange peels and let the dough rest for 20 minutes. Divide the dough into 6 equal portions. Fold the frozen cream cheese into the dough and shape them tightly into tiny boules. Leave it on the counter for 1 hour or until fully proofed. At the same time, preheat the oven at 250°C/480°F and pre-steam at the last ten minutes. Score the dough and bake at 250°C/480°F with steam for 10 minutes then without steam for 15 minutes more or until the internal temperature reaches a minimum of 205°F. Let cool for 1 hour before serving. These rolls have chewy and moist crumb but a crispy crust when toasted. The crumb is not very open probably due to over-proofing (the oven was occupied so I couldn’t heat it up in time for the rolls!) but acceptable to me for rolls. I adore the taste of these rolls! They taste mildly sweet thanks to barley, spelt and sprouted white wheat. Cream cheese, orange, sunflower and earl grey are such a killer combo! You get sweetness from cream cheese and orange, tanginess from cream cheese, toasty nuttiness from the sunflower seeds and whatever aromatic scent from the earl grey. Thanks Ian for inspiring such delicious rolls!
Hi bakers! Today I come here half happy and half unhappy. I'm happy because I baked my first loaf of sourdough using 50% of khorasan whole wheat flour (and I think that this flour is aromatic in such a particular way that reminds me of chamomile) but I'm not so happy because maybe I let the fermentation process gone too far and the bread came out a little bit flat :(. The crumb is still there and there are some holes but the spring didn't happen at all and I think it's because it's overprofed. What do you think? Have you ever baked with khorasan? PS the ingredients of my loaf were: 100gr leaven 250gr khorasan whole wheat flour 250gr white bread flour 400gr water 10gr salt
Hi bakers! I'm experimenting with sweet sourdoughs and I arrived at this formula after testing another one with less sugar. This loaf has 100gr of fine unrefined cane sugar and 150gr of toasted walnuts and I think that the sweetness now is on point. I used half wholegrain flour and half white bread flour, the fermentation was a little bit slower than my normal schedule due to the presence of the sugar (I asked Maurizio Leo and he said so, I thought it was the opposite! Silly me). I think I obtained a good spring in the oven even if there were the walnuts but I'm not so satisfied with the openness of the crumb, it seems a little bit denser than other experiments I've done. Have you ever baked a sweet sourdough, if so what was your experience? Have you got any advices for me? Thanks in advance for your feedbacks and happy baking!
Hello to all you wise sages out there.  Long post, but I'm really hoping you amazing bakers out there can ease my recent torment! So I'm a complete novice when it comes to artisan/rustic breads, and have a few obstacles that for the life of me can't get past.  The main goal is to achieve those explosive and beautiful oven springs that result in outrageously huge and irregular holes.  I've been baking basic pan loaves for years for my family, and only recently have begun to experiment with wet doughs, and I AM OBSESSED.  I've played around with different autolyzing times, bulk fermentation at room temp or cold retardation, final proofing at room temp or cold retardation, different pre-shaping/final shaping methods, etc., with various degrees of satisfaction, but never close to what I want--you know, stuff like what Trevor J Wilson and so many amazing bakers out here produce.  So here go my questions, and please please help me answer all these.  I would be eternally grateful! - It seems that almost 100% of the relevant discussions involve sourdough!  I don't have any experience in sourdough, but would like to eventually get there, but not before I'm 100% confident of my knowledge with wet doughs/basic artisan bread.  But here's the question: must one use sourdough to create those outrageous oven spring and open/airy crumb?  Can yeasted dough achieve that as well?  No one ever mentions yeasted dough when talking about open crumbs and oven spring - People seem to advise bulk fermenting and proofing times at room temp that involve hours on end.  Is it because it's sourdough and the natural yeast just takes longer than instant yeast?  I understand that room temperatures vary infinitely depending on what sort of climate one bakes in.  But just generally, I suspect that sourdoughs take longer to rise and ferment? - There's been plenty of talk about DDT.  Is it really THAT important?  If you don't pay attention to the DDT, would that render all other variables useless.  Can't you manipulate other variables to achieve strong oven spring, or DDT is a necessary consideration? - Also, seems like the vast majority of people shape and proof theirs doughs into a batard vs round boule.  What's the reason behind it?  Does the shape actually create bigger holes because there's less room for the dough to spread out in all directions? - I'm very confused about whether to de-gas or not.  Most comments/videos advise to handle the dough gently during pre-shaping and final shaping, and to not destroy any bubbles that have been created during bulk fermentation.  But just by releasing the dough from its container necessarily causes huge deflation.  And second, I see bakers slapping and stretching dough during shaping all the time.  I've even seen bakers pat the dough to get rid of bubbles and advising that they will return during final proof.  Even if I were to not consciously de-gas, the mere exercise of pinching the dough to stretch (for building tension) and shape a boule would involve deflation.  So just HOW careful should I be during pre-shaping and final shaping?  Should I de-gas a bit to create room for more gas to form during final proof, or should I completely try to avoid any disturbance to the dough whatsoever (then how the heck do you stretch/fold to shape a boule?)  Currently, I either stretch and fold in a clock-wise fashion or do the stitching method by Trevor J Wilson, then flip the dough ball over and do a round or two of tightening, all the while trying as hard as possible to not disturb the integrity of the dough.  The resulting ball is quite bubbly, jiggly and very delicate.  So is that good, or should it feel more substantial and solid, and let the final proof do its work in re-building bubbles? - Continuing on the topic of dough handling.  What's your preferred method of tipping dough out to prevent unnecessary tears and overall damage?  The Trevor J Wilson method of wetting hands then doing a letter fold then tipping the dough out?  He doesn't grease his container prior to bulk fermentation.  Do you grease your container before bulk fermenting?  Again, I fear one of my problems is the dough handling after bulk fermentation, from releasing to pre-shaping, to final shaping.  I feel and fear that too much gas has been lost during the handling. - What are your views on underproofing?  Seems like quite a few people advocate underproofing in order to achieve phenomenal oven spring.  Can I get some clarity on this point?  Underproof or not? - Finally, AP or bread flour?  I've read conflicting advice on this.  To me, bread flour makes more sense because of the stronger gluten to hold the gas in.  But someone also said the strong gluten structure prevents big bubbles from forming--like it's harder to inflate a strong and tight baloon.  Thoughts? Thank you SO SO very much for helping me with my OCD!  For reference, here's my basic formula - Biga 35% at about 70% hydration, prepared the night before and fermented in a wine cooler at 15C for about 12 hours - Then mix in bread flour, yeast, water (final hydration, including biga = 80%, total flour used = 450g), autolyze for 30 mins at room temp at about 24C (75F) or wine fridge at 15C (59F) - Add salt then mix with dough hook for 5 mins - rest 5 mins, then S&F 3-4 times at half hour increments - bulk ferment at room temp for a couple hours, or overnight retard in 10C (50C) fridge for 14 hours (I've had better results with the cold ferment) - tip out, pre-shape, covered bench rest for 10 minutes (it's hot and humid in Hong Kong right now, so kitchen temp is about 27C (81F) - shape then proof in banneton for about 45 mins at about 24C (75C) room temp or an hour in the wine fridge.  I finger test the dough and make sure it's slightly underproofed.  If the advice is to underproof, then I'm a bit lost at this stage.  How underproofed should the dough be? - Slash then bake in a 250C (482C)  pre-heated dutch oven.  Sometimes I mist the dutch oven, but it doesn't seem to make any difference.  If anything, the bread comes out flatter when I mist, but I don't know if there a cause and effect there. THANKS AGAIN everyone!
There are 2 reasons why I am celebrating!First is, it's my dad's 72nd birthday and second is...The one who is typing this post that you are currently reading is NOW a PROFESSIONAL LICENSED TEACHER!!!Yay! I really did not expect this. Various sources state that the Licensure Exam for Teachers is the most difficult licensure exam in our country. Yes, more difficult than exams for physicians, lawyers, architects and engineers! In fact it has the lowest passing rate about 10-20% for elementary and 20-46% for secondary level. Very far from the 60++% for physicians. It is not because the students are not good but because the exam is extremely difficult; it has the widest coverage based on the professional qualities of a teacher and almost all items are situational with all options having equal probability so each requires careful analysis. The moment  I left the examination room, I really conditioned myself that I will not pass because I had to rely most of the time on my gut feeling and maybe only close to 10% of the items were taught in school. But I prayed and prayed and the Almighty with His greatness and goodness granted me my license. I really don't know how to translate this but walang pagsidlan ang galak ko!  All of the hardships and sacrifices of mine and my parents are so worth it. They paid off. My dream is now in my hands.I'm really sorry if this post is getting too long but I'm just extremely happy and overwhelmed and still can't believe that I can now legally practice the profession.So I made the fruit cake a week ago as a surprise for my dad. I know it is not commonly eaten this time but its really one of the cakes that we adore, in fact maybe more than chocolate cake and we make sure to buy at least one once it is available in store. Some fruitcakes use honey and taste more delicate but I grew up with the darker bolder kind made with molasses so that's what I made, hence their dark color. I made them into smaller cakes instead of a single big cake because, a full fruitcake requires so much in preparing the tin so it will not burn in the long bake. If it has a high risk of burning in a standard oven, what more in the clay pot over a wood fire! I have no plans to burn all of that expensive fruit.This fruitcake is a simple one: golden and dark raisins and candied orange and lemon peel soaked in dark rum for 3 days and sunflower seeds. I know some folks age their fruit in liquor for a year but that's the only time I have, still better than no soaking at all. I used sunflower seeds because they're cheaper and taste a little like walnuts to me and I don't have to chop them to disperse them evenly in the cakes. If I had the money and they were available, I would also put candied cherries, candied pineapple, pecans, and walnuts.As simple as the fruit mix may seem, these cakes are loaded with fruit! I almost the thought that I did not have enough cake batter to hold them! It has 600+g of fruits and seeds for just over a cup of flour! As little as they may look, they are quite heavy and dense and took a full hour to bake.This is them hanging out in their "oven".I made 2 batches: one with only the fruits and one with spices namely cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves, I didn't put ground ginger in fear of my fruitcakes tasting like pumpkin pie. I also took one from each batch, poke holes all over them and fed them with alcohol to at least age for a week. I aged them in the fridge because I live in a hot climate and it is still summer now.Here is how they look like on the second day.And after a week, I don't know if it's the light but they seem darker.Here are some of them up close. The tops are shiny which we never seem to observe in commercial fruitcakes.One from the plain batch.One from the spiced batch.The plain fruitcake that's fed with alcohol.The spiced one fed with dark rum. It's the heftiest of the batch! To me, it just looks like a mini version of a classic British fruitcake with just a shiny top. They taste perfect. I think it really need a lot of candied peel because to us, it is what makes fruitcake taste like fruit cake. Perfectly sweet with the molasses really coming through. The unfed ones were not as moist as we like. For the flavor: the plain ones were good but they can't match the fragrance of the spiced ones. The combination of fruit and spices are sublime. So our favorite and the one I'm going to do if I will make fruitcakes again is the spiced one that's fed with dark rum. It tastes just like the ones we buy even though it has an incomplete cast of fruits and maybe even better because I made it, there's more fruit to it than cake.It really did not cross my mind that I will bake and even age fruitcakes someday or I will pass the Licensure Exam for Teachers and be a professional teacher. I'm really just happy for me and my parents. That's all folks, have a great day!
It's been a while since I baked a porridge bread so it was time to get to it.  I wanted to add a little sweetness of dates into the porridge and of course some roasted smashed skin on potatoes didn't hurt the crazy moist and soft crumb.  I had some left-over grilled onions so in that went as well.  The dates and onions both dissolved into the final dough but you could certainly taste their contribution in the final bake. This one makes great grilled bread and is fantastic with some butter or cheese. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, potatoes, onions and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 to 1.5 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
This is a small loaf built with a levain made with 1.5 g starter, 30 g water and 30 g bread flour. The levain was left to mature for about 12 hours on the counter at about 30 C room temperature. It was not used at its peak, since I could see that it receded way before I arrived home from work. The final total dough was about 250 g flour from which 50% is bread flour and the rest is a mix of rye, spelt and red fife. The total hydration was about 75%. I used a standard procedure for mixing, applying 4 stretches and folds every 30 min or so. Bulk fermented for about 4.5 hours, shaped, and proofed in the fridge overnight (about 5 hours) to bake it in a cold pot / cold oven. Great crumb and crust. The flavor is quite subtle, perhaps due to the levain, built using a small amount of starter.
Life's gotten the better of my time lately and Charlie's been well neglected in the fridge.. but thankfully he doesn't mind.. that said I decided to send him on journey and now part of Charlie is baking up a pizza storm in Virginia Beach with a good friend of mine.. Meanwhile, I finally got around to baking last week and made a Tartine whole wheat loaf and made Danni's version of the Swiss Raisin Muesli bread that I've been trying to replicate. Danni - great recipe.. First the Tartine - standard recipe crusted with oat bran.. By all accounts a great bread and what seems like a fool proof recipe.. And below is the swiss raisin muesli.. It was a good replica of the original but not yet there. I forgot to dig out my bread lame and after I put the loaf on the combo cooker bottom ended up scrambling and grabbed a knife and butchered a score before putting the lid on. Oh well.. regardless the bread spread out more than i thought it would. Not sure why.. I don't think it was from the score, or that I over proofed/retarded it. The taste was good but more subtle compared to the original. I think I'll double up the raisin water, the honey and the raisins.. and see how that works. I also think I might add a bit more oil. Danni - a great recipe, thanks for your efforts! This is the link to her recipe: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/55422/stonemill-healthy-artisan-swiss-raisin-muesli-bread-copycat-recipe Bee well.. bread1965
I was so very happy to see Ru back with us that I decided to make her Toasted Oat Sourdough.  I started of with a hiss and a roar and then decided I should check the recipe (alway dodgy to trust memory these days.) Wednesday evening I milled the whole wheat berries and rye berries that I would need for this recipe.  I sifted the wheat flour to get the bran. Levain Build (wednesday evening) 25 g refreshed starter + 105 g flour + 28 g bran + 106 g water. Mix and leave overnight on bench. Soaker (Thursday morning) 133 g rolled oats, dry toasted then cooled. Then added 266 g boiling water, covered and left while I went off to Pilates. Levain has risen but not looking as active as I would like so quite happy it is not ready yet. Final Dough Thursday 12:30 pm Levain is looking better, temperature has risen a bit so ok, ready to go.  Mix together 438 g bread flour + 20 g gluten + 229 g wholewheat + 8 g rye and 275 g water.  Not enough water for this dough!! Added another 55 g - still too stiff.  Added soaker and mixed in more or less.  Still to dry but will leave to autolyse 1 hour. 1:30 pm Add 17.8 g salt, 263 g levain and mix in.  It is still too firm for me so added another 50 g water.  Still think dough is too firm, I don't want a dense loaf.  I think I will add more water over stretch and folds. Stretch and fold 3 times incorporating another 30 g water (total water is now 410 g instead of 275 g!) and dough while still firm is more pliable. Leave to bulk ferment. 7:30 pm dough has increased in volume 60 - 70% so I preshape,- Lovely firm preshape leave for 45 minutes before easy final shaping.  Dough was divided into 2 * 555 g and 1 * .675 g loaves.  Overnight retard and baked Friday morning at 240 deg C, 15 minutes lid on and 20 minutes lid off. I checked Ru's method when I was ready to mix the dough and realised that she had used the wholewheat flour in her levain build.  I had used the bran + bread flour and the sifted wheat flour in the main dough.  This dough was super thirsty and it ends up at about 94 % hydration and I think I could have added more water still. Question: would using the wholewheat flour this way be more thirsty than if I had used it in the levain?  Does the added gluten make it more thirsty? Crumb shot This bread is really delicious and it will certainly be made often in future.  The 2 smaller loaves were gifts for friends. I needed some hamburger buns so I used the Hokkaido Milk bread recipe posted by Breadbabies. 100g rolls, flattened slightly before baking, brushed with milk and topped with sesame seed.  Hamburgers are on the menu tonight so I will see how it goes. Happy baking Leslie
This is one of the prettiest breads I bake - Buckwheat Cranberry Levain! I used to make it just for autumn / winter, but it is such a favourite that I decided to put it in the baking rotation today. This time I baked it in cast iron pots seam-side up, and the resulting natural burst is quite attractive. The original recipe was inspired by cmatecun's Buckwheat Cherry Levain, but I've probably modified somewhat over time.
I’ve been making Trevor’s Champlain sourdough a lot recently and have made progress but the open crumb still eludes me. This is last weekend’s bake and I’m pretty happy with it.  I increased the hydration by 2% and that helped. But I’m nowhere near “volcanic crumb”. Very pleased with the oven spring and blisters!
So I’ve always wondered of different brands of flours actually made a difference, and from researching the internet, the answer seemed obvious... yeah. Especially KA flour, which seems to have an extremely loyal group of followers. But rather than just taking their word for it, I wanted to put it to the test. So I made 2 loaves of the same bread, but one with KA bread flour, one with cheap, store brand bread flour. I was able to get the store brand bread flour on sale for only $1 (score!), while KA bread flour was about $5 a bag. So now that we’ve established that there was a drastic price difference, it comes down to the actual flour itself. Obviously, I was pretty skeptical of this $1 flour, and I had to put it to the test. A side-by-side comparison was the only way to go. The recipe I use to test was from KA website. I made their Hokkaido Milk Bread, or Japanese milk bread. The link can be found here: https://www.kingarthurflour.com/recipes/japanese-milk-bread-rolls-recipe I've made this recipe several times before and the result is always the softest, fluffiest, almost melt-in-your mouth bread. First, you make a tangzhong by combining flour, milk and water, cooking it until it thickens. Then, it relies on very heavy kneading in order to achieve the right texture and and crumb. Store-brand flour loaf: So I decided to make my first loaf with the generic store-brand flour. I made the tangzhong and put all the ingredients into the stand mixer and began the kneading. I waited for the dough to become smooth and elastic. And waited. And waited. Okay, so it took a little more than an hour for the store-brand flour bread to knead into a beautiful, smooth bread dough. That's a pretty long time... I have to guess that the long knead time may have been due to lower gluten-content, which caused the dough to require a longer amount of time for enough gluten to develop. But eventually, it kneaded up into a nice and smooth dough that passed the windowpane test (I found it a bit difficult to take a picture of showing the windowpane test, so it's not perfect). I had to run out for a little so I let it bulk ferment in the fridge. When I came back, it was ready to shape and proof for the final bake. Usually. For Japanese milk bread, I like to make 3 rolls and put them side-by-side, so they look like 3 cute little mountains when they bake. The dough was very smooth and shaped up nicely. Again, I let it proof until the rolls were puffed-up and very soft and airy. Ready to bake! A giant bubble formed during the final proof, not quite sure how that happened. Also, I may have not shaped it well, because a few tears began to appear on the side rolls. Or maybe the store-brand bread flour wasn't strong enough to withstand the proof? Anyways, the bread baked out nicely, aside from the tears on the surface. The bubble disappeared for some reason. It bread rose nicely in the oven, and it smelled wonderful (oh, the smell of baking bread!). Is it just me or does anybody else think that bread can be cute? My initial thoughts: It's bread, all right. It seems pretty soft and springy. Has anybody else heard the good bread is like a sponge? That if you press it, it should spring right back into the original shape? I'm not sure if it's true. Anyways, the results seemed pretty decent. Time to see if KA bread flour can beat it out, though I hadn't tasted it yet. King Arthur's Bread Flour: So I followed the procedure the same way: made the tangzhong, combined all the ingredients, and kneaded it all together. Only this time, it only took 45 minutes for it to become a smooth and elastic dough. Actually, I could feel a difference in the dough. KA flour's bread dough felt a lot softer and smoother than the store-brand bread dough. I doubt that it was because I over-kneaded the store-brand bread dough because I had kept a very close eye on it. I have a feeling that the flour really did make a difference. Anyways, wow! That is a significant time difference for kneading the dough. 15 minutes may not seem like a lot to some people, but it really is. Again, I had to run out for a little so I let the dough bulk-ferment in the fridge and came back later to shape the dough. Soooo, I forgot to take a picture immediately after shaping, so these rolls have already proofed for a little bit. Also, I forgot to take a picture of the bread that had fully proofed, and the bread right after I pulled it out of the oven. The rolls proofed beautifully. I thought that maybe I hadn't shaped these well either, and that they would tear like the other loaf, but nope. No tears! The bread rose beautifully in the oven. My initial feel of the loaves, the KA loaf was definitely softer. The crust didn't seem as tough of thick. But first, we needed to slice into the loaves and actually taste the bread before we could compare. One thing I noticed was that the store-brand flour loaf (top) had a split where it rose in the oven. while the KA loaf didn't. Was it because I didn't proof the store-brand loaf enough, or what? If anybody knows a possible reason, please comment. KA flour loaf is on the left, store-brand flour is on the right. So just looking at the bread, the crumb doesn't look TOO different, except the crumb for the KA loaf seemed very slightly airier. However, I could feel a difference. The KA loaf definitely had a softer crumb and crust. When I tasted them, the store-brand flour bread was pretty good. Soft and fluffy. However, the KA flour loaf was definitely softer and the crust was a little less tough. However, I wanted to actually put it to the test, with my family. I let them try both the crust and the crumb, without knowing which bread was from which loaf. This eliminates some potential bias I may have. The winner was clear with my family. They all agreed that KA flour loaf was better, with softer texture and crust. However, a few members said the difference was pretty small, though some thought the difference was obvious. My conclusion? The store-brand flour baked a pretty decent loaf. Especially if you're just baking for fun or just starting out, $1 for a 5 lb bag of bread flour is a pretty good deal. However, there was definitely a difference in the 2 loaves, like in the kneading time. If you're willing to shell out a few extra bucks to save some time and maybe get a better loaf, KA flour is definitely the way to go. I made some delicious fruit sandwiches with the KA loaf with the some strawberries, bananas, blueberries and nectarines: As for the store-brand loaf, since it wasn't as soft, I made french toast. I love using Hokkaido milk bread for french toast, and the store-brand loaf french toast was still perfect to make french toast. What do you guys think? Are you willing to spend a few extra dollars on KA bread flour? I definitely am. Also, if you have any thoughts about my test procedure, or just the bread making process in general, please comment. I'd love to hear your feedback, and I'm always looking for knew ways to make better bread. Happy baking!
I haven’t made Baguettes in over a year and I’m pretty rusty although I’ve never been as consistent or practiced as the master. I used the “36 hour + Baguettes” recipe by txfarmer, but I reduced the hydration to 72% which was too dry in retrospect, but easier to handle when out of practice. I used Central Milling Type 70 malted flour which gives excellent flavor. Wow do I need practice scoring! Not a bad crumb though. And the other problem is that they seem to disappear pretty fast!
This is an update on the small amount starter experiment. I followed Dab's suggestion to drop the starter amount to 1 g and reduce the amount of fermented flour in the levain. The levain was built using 1g starter, 10 g bread flour and 10 g water. Left to mature on the counter at 30C for about 8 hours. The final dough was comprised of 220 g total flour (including levain's flour) and 75% hydration. I used a similar flour mix as in the first experiment: 50% bread flour and the rest a mix of white spelt, rye and ruchmehl (half-half whole wheat). Basic steps were used to build the dough and the bulk fermentation occurred over 4 hours. About 3 stretches and folds have been applied and not much handling of the dough was done. Shaped and proofed in the fridge for about 5 hours, and baked straight our from the fridge. Even though the fermented flour in the levain was a mere 5%, it got the job done without any issues. Now I am even more concerned on how to spend my starter, since I have been using pretty much nothing to build up my levain, and I have not refreshed it for at least two weeks already. This method has worked well twice, so I think I will keep it throughout summer. Cheers
Hi bakers, few days ago I posted a khorasan loaf and I wasn't totally happy because of the lack of spring! Today I tried again with the exact same recipe and I am proud to say that I now have a ear :) The spring isn't the biggest but, since khorasan is not a very strong flour (as some of you pointed out), I am happy with it. The crumb is good and I think that the aromas and flavors of khorasan can compensate this lack of spring, I'. in love with its chamomile taste and smell and with its mildly yellow color. I have to point out that here in Italy the temperature has gone up quickly (we have 27-30 degrees in the middle of the day), and for this reason I think I have to look after the dough even more accurately and to adjust the proving time over the feelings. It's amazing to see how external elements can determinate the bread and how you have to be the best observer you can to have the same result in different conditions. Let me know what you think of this second khorasan experiment of mine! Happy baking, ciao!
THis is my recipe for this loaf: 100g bread flour leaven 100% hydration 400g bread flour and 280g water autolyzed for 8 hours Added mixture of 40g WW, 30g Dark Rye, 30g Spelt , 60g water, 1T dry malt Multigrain mixture and leaven added to autolyzed mixture 4.5hr bulk fermentation folding 2x 30m and 45m every hour 3.5hr proofing 28C rm temp BAked 250C in dutch oven 25m and without top 220C for 25m
… with good results, I decided to adapt the recipe for a 750g loaf, plus a bit. Starting off with 120g 100% hydration rye starter (base NMNF), I built a loaf comprising a mix of 33% rye, 20% each of whole wheat, AP and HG flours, 10% spelt, 1.75% caraway seeds, 1% VWG, 2% malt powder, with a reduction in water resulting in 73% overall hydration. Slow bake for some 40 minutes, starting at 235oC reducing to 220oC after 20 minutes, this delivered a pleasing and rather tasty loaf with a decent rise and happy crumb.  Thank you Edo bread for the template!
I really tested my knowledge and experience the other day. I had a bit of firm biga left from something else I was making and I hate wasting stuff, so I decided to make it into a loaf of bread. I did not measure anything for this, at all, so can't give you the recipe, but here's what I did: I am so pleased how this turned out. It's absolutely delicious, for one thing. The smell of the cream cheese and onions is mouth-watering. I'm happy with the crumb and the crust as well, and pretty excited about the whole thing! Lots of fun too. :)
Following on the path of my West Coast baking friends DA and Lucy, I was inspired to make a mostly white bread with a few twists.  I had not used Kamut for a while, so in went some fresh milled and sifted once with a #40 sieve into the mix along with a high percent of pecans and a healthy dose of buttermilk. The dough was very hydrated coming in at just under 85% hydration but was still very manageable to shape.  I decided to follow the resident baguette expert at TFL Mr. Donnie Bags and shape part of the dough into the aforementioned shape. Download the BreadStorm File Here. The dough baked up nicely with a nice golden brown crust and yellow open and chock full of nuts crumb.  A great bread for some cheese or brushed with  fresh olive oil and grilled. Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I usually do this the night before.  Use immediately or refrigerate for up to 2 days. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours,  and the buttermilk together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 60 minutes or longer.    Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), and the water, and mix on low for 5 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (If you have a proofer you can set it to 78 degrees and follow above steps but you should be finished in 1 hour to 1.5 hours). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 550 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 465 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 210 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Now for something completely different for those of you who are interested!  Some late spring garden photos for your viewing pleasure.
Last night I made six loaves of Tartine. Four, using the basic formula, I bake last night after a three hour rise. Two of them I added rosemary and sautéed shallots. Two of them I started a little later and refrigerate overnight for a morning bake. Those two had 20% gray flour, 10% whole wheat, and 70% bread flour. This is the 3 hour bake without gray flour This is the overnight gray flour bake
I repeated last week’s bake of 36+hour Baguettes, overall hydration at 74% this time. The shaping went much better and although I thought the scoring was easier the cuts didn’t open up as well as I hoped. Type 70 flour, proofed en couch and transferred to the stone by flipboard. 4 Demi-baguettes, 15” long, 250 grams dough weight each. Baked with hot water on lava rocks for steam in the first half of the bake. It’s a good challenge and there’s always a reason to do it again! I need to shuffle the loaves around on the stone next time to get the sides to brown more evenly The crumb is pretty good with nice glossy cell walls and the darn things keep disappearing along with the chèvre. Tom
So a busy day, a really good bake and we had thunder, lightening, rain (142 mm in 24 hours) but although we are expecting more rain tonight, it has been quieter! Thank heavens. Leslie
I love making bread but until now haven't had much success with sourdough. I think I've "cracked" it now - the flavor and texture is pretty good but it's cracking on top. I'm using the no knead method, mixing the dough the night before, folding in the morning (can be anything from 12-28 hours) and leaving to prove for an hour or so. My Dutch oven is a little too large for the amount of dough so I put another dish inside it and this work well. With my first two attempts the dough was really wet and hard to work with. I changed the recipe (the one I used for this   is from Breadtopia) and the dough is firmer but still a little tacky to touch. I think even although I do slice the dough on top (difficult because it's tacky) the crust would still separate - it almost looks like pork crackling. It's really only cosmetic but guess I'm a perfectionist. To cook I heat up the Dutch oven with the second dish inside, bake at 220C for 45 minutes, remove the lid and bake a further 10-15 minutes. I've had to increase the first cook time a further 10 minutes for the last two as it still looked a little doughy. I'm looking forward to exploring your site and trying new recipes.
These are my first baguettes, ever! I am so glad with how they turned out especially that they were not baked in an oven. I feel that it is a real accomplishment in my baking; I thought baguettes were impossible to bake in my clay pot, but I just defied that today. Perhaps the only impossible clay pot bakes are breads that cannot be flipped like a pizza but if it can be flipped, I can handle it! :)These are Vietnamese baguettes, ones used for banh mi which means these have rice flour in the dough. It is not confirmed if it is true or not but I saw baguettes with rice flour in TFL and experienced its effect in bread doughs in the past so I added a bit here too. They differ from classic French baguettes in that they have a lighter, airier, fluffier crumb with a thinner more crackly crust. A banh mi place opened here a couple of years ago and I was amazed with its taste, it was a harmony of contrasting flavors and textures. I don't know if their baguettes were from Vietnam but it had those characteristics. My favorite was the grilled pork banh mi. Within a few years that I have not visited, I just found out that they were closed but I miss banh mi so much that I decided to try make my own. Fillings are easy to make however the bread was not.Banh mi dough is highly standardized in Vietnam so no one actually knows what goes in the dough. I consulted various sources and proceeded to make my own dough. I used some AP flour, rice flour, water, sugar, salt and a BF-fed levain. Most recipes I found added ascorbic acid to the dough but I omitted it and just relied on the lactic and acetic acids produced by my starter. To provide additional lift to the dough, I added a bit of baking powder. I poured water until I got a gloopy mess then kneaded it until I got a strong windowpane, it roughly took 30 minutes. The dough was pretty strong at the end. Bulk fermentation took 4 hours until more than doubled. I divided it into 3 and preshaped them into tight boules then they went to the fridge immediately.The next day I shaped them quite differently from how you shape French baguettes. I flattened the boules into a sort of rectangular shaped with one end wider than the other then you roll tightly into a cylinder then taper the ends by applying more pressure as you roll it outward. Although the dough is so wet, it was not so sticky to shape.I proofed them for 1 hour. They doubled so quickly.  I am not that confident in scoring dough so I mustered enough courage then scored confidently. In Vietnam, they only do a single long slash. I also tried the classic scoring. I struggled with making a straight single long slash and it did not open up so well. I think I did better with the classic one because it was easier because the blade has to travel shorter. I baked them in my clay pot over heated pebbles and had I shaped them any longer, they will not fit in my pot anymore! Average length was 8 inches or 20 centimeters.Here are the baked baguettes.The crust was super crispy when they came out of the clay pot.Is that an ear? I'm not sure what an ear is. Please enlighten me.I should have changed hand positions to pick the loaf up in a better angle.Crumb shots. The crumb was very soft and light with the slightest bit of chew and fluffy and tight typical of its kind. Mine were just moister and a little more stretchier than a banh mi baguette crumb.I can pull out the crumb easily like this.Ready to be filled with various fillings.Although I tried to achieve a Vietnamese baguette, the results are actually in between a Vietnamese and a French baguette. The crumb is lighter, tighter, softer, airier and fluffier than a traditional French baguette but the crust was not as thin, delicate, crisp and crackly as a Vietnamese baguette. I think I have made a new baguette, can they be called Philippine baguettes or more accurately Pal baguettes or baguettes à la Pal?The crust became soft after cooling which was easily remedied by a brief toasting prior to filling (that's what they do in Vietnam too, right? but over charcoal) probably because the baguettes were small and can't be baked long enough to drive out the moisture for that long lasting crispiness. Should I make a drier dough or bake them longer over gentler heat. I am happy with the crumb though. I prefer the look of the classic baguette with multiple cuts, I think it was way prettier!The taste was complex. Sweet with a little tang and a clean wheat flavor with dark caramelized notes from the bold bake. They were a bit light on their own which means they lend themselves extremely well to sandwiches. Honestly, they were much more flavorful than the baguettes used in the now closed banh mi place that I used to visit here.Now I understand why some folks here chase baguette perfection. It's so much fun and fulfilling even with failures. I can't wait to make a French baguette or really, I can't wait to make another baguette of any kind though I know 24 inch ones are just another dream for me because of the limited size of my clay pot. I still can't believe that these baguettes came out of my clay pot!I chose to make a simple banh mi this time which is not a very popular variation. Thankfully Helen from Helen's recipes brought it to light! Good Bread + Good Egg = BlissFry it sunny-side up then drizzle it with Maggi! We also have an affinity with Maggi sauce. Rice and just it is a lunch, an egg is just a bonus!It's a nice snack when you wander off-road. The combination of the light and crispy bread, the rich eggs and the savory Maggi sauce is just so satisfying! I was also surprised with how filling it was, it sustained me for 3 hours!It's my birthday and I just received the best birthday gift. I just verified my licensure exam rating and it was unexpectedly very high. I just prayed to pass with a 75.00 rating but God made me achieve more than that. It was just 2.20 points short from making it to the top 10 passers of the hardest licensure exam here!  As a techer with a major in social science, I might ask you sometimes a question or two about history, culture or food. :) It's fun to know other people and cultures through food. I once made an Ethiopian student taking his PhD in my university smile. He was alone and I ask him if he was a French teacher and he said a no, a FIRM NO! Then I asked him where is he from and he said Ethiopia, so I said "Wow! Do you make and eat injera here?" and he flashed a huge smile. Then I said again "I know you you sometimes make it as a plate and you eat it with doro wat." he smiled again this time much bigger. He said he never thought that someone outside his country will know something about their culture. I even studied simple Amharic (Ethiopia's official language which is so difficult for me) greetings and greeted him whenever I saw him and with that we became friends during his stay in the university. Well, I only learnt about injera here so thanks a lot TFL!Feeling more than contented, we just bought some KFC which is my favorite fried chicken of course with some rice and lots of gravy (I hope you don't find it strange, I think it's only here where it is done!) and some ice cream (again with strange flavours!) for a simple celebration.It was what I ate too during the 12 grueling hours of the exam.And some mangoes just harvested today!God blessed me with another year in my life and I am very thankful for it along with all the blessings that I have received this year. Thank you TFLers! I hope you enjoyed this post as much as I did!
… bakes by Lechem and leslieruf presented a personal challenge, so midweek I retrieved my aging AYW from the depths of the fridge, fed it a fresh apple and tried my hand at Hamelman’s recipe this weekend.  These pictures tell half the story, and the second half will follow with a crumb shot tomorrow – my first slice will be a celebration of SA’s victory over England at rugby this evening!  At first blush the raisins look a bit sun burnt notwithstanding a bake at 230C with protective stainless steel lid for the first 15 minutes followed by the balance of time at 220C.
I grew up having papo secos (pops), Portuguese buns, on a regular basis. Everything went in these things or just eaten as is or with soft butter. So, when I began baking bread I had to attempt these and have since made them a few times. When memorial day came around a while back I of course had burgers and I used my papo secos recipe to do so and the result was slamming! A few had sesame seeds and egg wash with honey and others were naked as a Jay Bird..... And not to disrespect the original I made the pops too. Oh, and here's a Chicago dog I put together.
Just some pictures from my first venture into pita.
Last night I made a little Spelt loaf.......... it was SO good that I repeated it again this morning. I used the Patrick Ryan method.......... but altered the handling times a little :) This is simply the lightest and tastiest Wholemeal Spelt loaf I have ever made! Here are my notes if you fancy a go: (Sorry for the text layout, I uploaded this from my iPhone Baby Spelt loaf
I haven’t baked for the last couple of weekends because I was in Antigua for my niece’s wedding. It was my first time in the Caribbean and it was fabulous. Great resort, great food and fantastic weather. It sure beats what we have been having here. I am continuing  baking breads inspired by CedarMountains recipes from a couple of years ago. This one is very similar but not exactly like his. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Main dough: 100 g Kamut berries 100 g Spelt berries 100 g Red Fife berries 110 g Rye berries 700 g unbleached flour 50 g flax seeds 15 g white sesame seeds 750 g water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 220 g 100% hydration bran/rye flour levain (procedure is in recipe) Porridge: 45 g kamut flakes 45 g spelt flakes 180 g water 30 g full fat plain yogurt A few days before: The night before: Main dough: Baking day: The oven spring wasn’t huge. Satisfactory, but it could have been a tad better. I suspect it was due to my shaping issues. I wonder if my use of water during shaping weakened the surface of the boules and I should stick to using only flour at that point.
Today I baked a big (10 loaves) batch of Forkish's Harvest Bread from FWSY. This is a poolish bread with a high percentage of pre-fermented flour, a good proportion of whole wheat flour (stone ground from a local farm) and added wheat germ and bran. It's a lovely dough to handle and bake. I made the poolish in the morning, then mixed the dough in the evening, putting it in the fridge for an overnight retard after about 1.5 hours fermenting at room temperature. This morning I scaled it to 750 grams and baked it on hot stones with steam after around 2 hours of room-temperature resting / proofing. The loaves were shaped into 'chubbs' and scored with a single curved slash down the length, blade held at an angle to the skin. And look at those ears! I love it when that happens. :)
I just recently received a shipment of T65 Moulin D'Auguste which is my go to flour for baguettes. I'll usually breeze thought 30lbs in a couple of months and then restock. with each shipment there's usually a slight difference in the way the flour performs. This shipment however has thrown me for a bit of a loop. First thing I noticed was the usual 72% hydration was incredibly sticky - felt like 80+% and was near impossible to score. A few bakes later and I've found that 65-66% feels about 'normal'. It's a bit freaky since with other batches I've pushed to 75% and still been able to manage he dough, however with this new flour I am sure 75% would be ciabatta. Just thought it might be interesting to point put the degree of variation from this imported brand.  never once have I seen anything near the same degree of fluxuation with a domestic mainstream brand before. Definitely keeps you on your toes. Anyone else dealt with this sort of challenge - ie, one brand / type with this much variation ?
I have another experiment using minimal amount of starter. This time I have not built any levain, and mixed 1 g starter with other ingredients. I tried to adjust the process to my schedule, which is mix in the morning, bulk ferment during the day, shape in the evening, retard overnight and bake in the following morning. The measurements were 1 g starter, 220 g flour, 165 g water, and 3 g salt. The flour was 55% bread flour and the rest a mix of dark rye, red fife and whole wheat. Mixed in the morning (dissolved starter in water first), applied two stretches and folds, and after one hour placed the dough in the fridge for bulk fermentation. Roughly 12 hours later, removed the dough from the fridge without much noticeable signs of fermentation. Let it rest on the counter at room temperature for another 5 hours with two extra stretches and folds. Finally some signs of bulk fermentation showed up, so I shaped as a boule and placed it in the fridge for another 5 hours retarding (it was time to go to bed). Baked in the morning straight from the fridge to the results below. There has been few holes, even though not evenly distributed. Oven spring was reasonable but nothing spectacular. The crumb was quite soft and the crust baked light. Flavor showed some good nuttiness and a subtle tang, just the way sourdough should be. I have done this experiment by building a 5%-flour levain with superior results as compared to using only 1 g starter without any levain build. Using 1 g starter without building a levain seems to work, but I need to tweak the method for my schedule and to improve the results. The bulk fermentation is too slow in the fridge due to the small amount of starter. However, I have tried to ferment it in room temperature for the same time. The result was a failure because the temperature is being too high and the long fermentation at room temperature seems to be damaging the dough structure. The result was a pancake as shown below (with some signs of over proofing too). Additionally, the bread was too sour due to the long fermentation at high temperature. I did not like the dough structure after the long fermentation. It was almost too wet and soup-like, so the flat bread resulted. I still want to do another final test at room temperature, which will be making a stiff dough with low hydration, fermenting at room temperature, and then provide a second hydration in the evening. I just want to slow down the fermentation in room temperature so the dough structure is not compromised to a great extension.
There are many reasons why people bake bread...for many it is a basic necessity of daily life to feed themselves and their families; for some it is a business while for others it is simply an enjoyable pastime, a hobby.  That's why I started baking bread a few years ago, just a hobby.  But after many loaves baked over the past few years I have come to appreciate there is much more to this hobby than I first thought; the reason I bake bread is because of the meditative and calming nature of the process, the honest and universally understood gesture of sharing fresh bread and of course, the simple pleasure of eating good bread. All this to say, bread baking is good for me, a process that takes me off the edge, calms and momentarily allows me time to breathe and think. I have struggled for many years with PTSD and all of the depression, anxiety, social stigma, anger, despair, isolation that goes with it. I have lost friends and comrades I served with to substance abuse and suicide because there has been little support, help or care available; more than 20 deaths by suicide in 2017 alone. But last month, after too many years of denial and inaction, hope....the government finally passed an amendment to the current workers' compensation legislation, a presumptive clause that presumes PTSD as an expected outcome for first responders rather than challenging and denying such claims. What's all this got to do with bread you ask?  Well, the last time I posted there wasn't much hope, now, with the new legislation there is.  So, for that reason, it seemed to me to be a good day to bake some Pretty Tasty Sourdough Bread. 2 hour autolyse then an initial series of 50 stretch/folds to mix in the levain and salt.  Bulk fermentation for four hours with four series of stretch/folds every thirty minutes for the first two hours; porridge was mixed in after the second series of stretch/folds. I made two boules and set them in linen lined baskets to cold proof overnight.  The loaves were baked in pre-heated pots directly out of the fridge after 12 hours; covered at 500 F for 25 minutes then 450 F for 10 minutes; uncovered at 450 F for 18 minutes to finish.  I was happy to see the spring and scoring pattern when I removed the lids. The bread has a nice oat flavour and a chewy, soft crumb with bits of flax and hulless oats throughout.
I did not have any plans to post this but as a record of by baking journey, I decided to post it today.I found some candied peel last month in my favorite baking supplies store that's about to go bad (well, actually more of about to decline in quality) in 5 days which was on sale 50% off. It was expensive with it's regular price I thought, and now I can buy this without burning a hole in my pocket for me to taste it and use it in recipes. I immediately grabbed 2 bags then I thought it was the perfect time for me to try making panettone since I already have an established starter. I also grabbed some golden raisins and paid all of them at the counter. Half of the peels went to the fruit cake that I posted last time and half went into this.It's my dream to bake a panettone though almost everyone thinks it is a humongous challenge to make but one day I have gathered enough courage to try my hand at it. Everything was going well; my starter more than triples in 4 hours, the first dough nicely tripled until it was time to add the enrichment. Panettone is something best done in a mixer but I'm stubborn so I still went even if I only have my hands. I was surprised with how soupy it was, because it's been a long time I have handled doughs like this in addition to stress and lack of sleep I was rattled and added a ton of flour to the dough. When I finished incorporating it, it was so dry and stiff and the dough almost doubled in mass; things you don't want for a rich but light as air bread. From that point on, I know this was bound to fail but I still continued hoping for something edible. I don't want to waste those sugar, eggs and butter; I'm going all or nothing here!I dumped all the raisins and the candied peel into the dough and kneaded them in. After a 2 hour rest I shaped them into 2 boules (I only planned to make 1 but the dough almost doubled because of the added flour) and proofed one in the tin overnight at room temperature. The other boule was retarded for several days before it was baked because I can't squeeze it in my tight schedule due to prior commitments (and maybe also due to a little frustration). To add salt to the wound, the first one stuck in the tin so i had to pry it out and it was torn into pieces so we just ate it and no pictures. I was more careful with the second one so it had some photos, I put parchment paper in the tin so no sticking. I slashed it after proofing overnight at room temperature and baked it in my clay pot for 30 minutes with live fire and another 30 minutes over embers and this is what I got. Oven spring leaves much to be desired. You can also tell it by the way the cut expanded. I did not flip it so the top was a little pale but the bottom was not burnt and is a little thick and crispy with the top soft and a bit moist. The crumb was dry and dense but studded by the raisins and candied peel.Although it looks nothing like panettone and might even offend some PPP (People Passionate for Panettone), I still do not consider it a total failure. Only the texture suffered but the taste was superb. No tang at all, sweet, rich and buttery with the taste of the raisins and the candied peel shining through. It is very seldom that we taste something as great as this. My dad is very picky about his food but this one received no complaints from him. In fact it was the inspiration why I made the fruitcakes, the same flavor profile that my dad loves. We just found out that it wast the combination butter, eggs, raisins and candied peel that make fruitcakes taste fruitcakes and so delicious so I made  a batch for his birthday last month.The texture was perfect to turn it into french toast but it did not see the light of the next day anymore for its milk and egg bath because it was gone in a flash! It was that good.We're celebrating our 120th Independence Day today so here is a photo of me wearing our traditional formal wear. This was taken as souvenir photo when we passed the licensure exam. I'm still looking for what to wear for our oath taking. (Each teacher is a trustee of the cultural and educational heritage of the nation.) Happy Independence Day to all my countrymen! Maligayang Araw ng Kalayaan!I hope you enjoyed this post! Happy baking everyone!
I wonder if there is a bread equivalent of bombe glacée?! https://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/bread-sparks-bomb-scare_uk_5b1fdc27e4b0adfb826e1c0b
I was well on my way to completing what would have been my best loaf yet. Everything was coming along perfectly as these things rarely do when you're a beginner bread baker. Had great gluten development, pre-shaping and final shaping were very good despite a rather wet dough (50/50 AP and high extraction bread flour @ 80%). This was suspect. Everything was going too well. The crucial mistake wouldn't manifest itself until hours after the fact. The heart sinking moment came after the final rise when I attempted to remove the dough from the bowl it was rising in. The bowl that cradled my novice error. I flipped over the bowl onto my peel and noticed the couche that was lying on top of the dough currently and during proofing was slightly wet. And my heart sank. I had a feeling it was a bad idea to have a wet dough rise on a couche that was apparently also not floured well enough. Needless to say the dough was totally stuck to the couche and i essentially had to rip it off, losing all that precious gas that had built up over the day of fermenting. Determined not to totally throw away my days work, I quickly and gently reshaped it and slid it into the oven. This was the final product It was definitely misshapen, and obviously lacked some volume due to the ripping of the dough, but still had a great flavour and was pleasantly surprised with the crumb as well. I am now doubly determined to pick up where I left off prior to my crucial mistake and complete what was supposed to be my best loaf yet. This may still have been my best yet despite the blunder, which makes it all the more frustrating knowing what could have been. This morning I ran right to the store to pick up some rice flour which will be used liberally for today's proofing. P.S. anyone know how to salvage this?
I used 3% of bright dragon fruit powder in the dough with starter and after the bake, the color completely disappeared! So much for anticipating a pink loaf... live and learn.
Hi bakers, I'm back with one of my favorite formula ever: 20 % rye. I have to admit that the last few baked breads weren't very good, and I think that a reason for it could be the fact that I have to adjust the timings with the hot temperatures that are going on here in Italy. But finally I think I made it, with this rye dough I stared at every passage and I managed to gain the right times almost in every passage; the only issue being the fact that maybe the bulk fermentation could be pushed a little bit further. I'm going to write all the passages in order to let you know the details and to have a feedback about some advices or suggestions to be a better baker the next time. Formula: 100gr whole rye flour 400gr type 1 flour (here in Italy we call this way a semi-whole wheat flour with a good power, circa 12% protein) 410gr lukewarm water 10gr pink himalayan salt 100gr leaven (built the night before with 20gr type 1 flour starter, 40gr water, 40gr type 1 flour) Process: 8 PM: built the leaven and let it sit overnight covered with a clean towel 5 AM: mix the leaven with the water first and then add all the flour. Let it sit for one hour covered 6 AM: add the salt and mix well with the pinch tecnique and let it sit for half an hour coverd 6.30-8 AM: fold three time, one time every half an hour 8-9 AM: bulk fermentation without foldings, during this time the dough should rise a lot and form some bubbles 9 AM: preshape phase where I tried to develop more gluten strength by moving the dough onto a very lightly floured surface, then I let it rest on the bench for 20 min 9.20 AM: I shaped the dough and put it into the proofing basket and let it rest covered for circa one hour (in the photo you see how active it was at this stage) 10.20 AM: I put the dough in the fridge for the retarded fermentation and let it rest there for eight hours 18.20 PM: baked the bread: 20 minutes covered at 245 degrees C and the 25 minutes uncovered at the same temperature. I am very satisfied with this bread because I was so in tune with all the passages of the process that I feel more connected to it then with the other breads I baked in the past. It is a learning process and I am amazed about how easy it is to forget how important the art of adaptation and adjustment is. I put in also a crumb shot: this is the perfect pattern for a toast or for a bruschetta, right amount of holes but not so many that the filling would fell down (you know what I mean). I hope to read your feedback and I really thank all of you for the constant inspiration I gain from this community! Happy baking, Beatrice! X
I called this Soon Doo Boo Sourdough! I used only 10% levain and used kimchi liquid, silk tofu, green onions and black sesame seeds. It took around 24 hours until bake. The flavor came out mildly savory and the soft texture was  wonderful toasted.
One of my brothers asked me to make buns to go with the burgers and crab we are having tomorrow for Father’s Day. I surfed a number of recipes but kept coming back to this one. https://stellaculinary.com/recipes/baking-pastry/baking/bread/hamburger-brioche-buns-large So here they are... I doubled the recipe and scaled them to 115 -116 g each. And instead of baking them in a foil collar as suggested in the recipe, I used 6 inch foil pie pans. I did half with sesame seeds and half plain. We will see how the family likes them tomorrow.
Anyone who has been around TFL long enough and is suspiciously odd (or bored) enough knows that my baguette journey began with my baking the Anis Bouabsa baguette.  For the uninitiated, M. Bouabsa is a bread baker in Paris who won the quite prestigious annual city-wide competition in 2008 for the Best Baguette in Paris, and with about 30 competitors it was no small feat.  His rewards included accolades, bragging rights and a meeting with the French President.  Oh, and supplying the presidential palace with baguettes for a year. My wife's cousin celebrated her 90th birthday with a party last weekend.  Just about a lifelong resident of Paris she invited local relatives and friends as well as her American family, my in-laws included. As our favorite travel partners and nonogenarians themselves, the in-laws asked us to chaperone them to Paris for the event.  Our main goal was to ensure their safety every step of the way.  Literally.  So when folks gush at our vacationing in Paris I have to stop them right there.  It was not a vacation.  Although we had a good time with family there.  And no matter what, we were in Paris, for-cryin' out loud. We had our free time in the mornings as their day often doesn't begin until 11 or so.  This past Monday, the only rainy day of the trip, we clambered down the Paris Metro steps and headed up to M. Bouabsa's boulangerie. When he came out to see who was asking for him, I showed him a still from the video I posted a few years ago on the making of his baguettes.  To our utter surprise he said that he recognized me and "knew who I was".  He invited me in to see his workshop and I asked if my wife and cousins could come in also.  Yes. And then we talked shop.  I don't know more than a few words of French and he doesn't understand English.  But he spoke in French, I spoke in Spanish and we seemed to be on the same page.  I guess shop talk and some hand gestures make a conversation a little more universal.  Unbeknownst to me Cousin Paul videoed about a minute of the encounter. Also unbeknownst to my wife, as she hogged the picture frame during part of the encounter! The boys talking business Baguettes after their long cold retard A huge Pain de Campagne on the loader just after coming out of the oven. T65 flour waiting to become baguettes The Tzara Tradicion baguette.  M. Bouabsa's boulangerie is on Rue Tristan Tzara. A peek into the workshop from the storefront. We picked up cups of expresso and cafe creme, croissants, a pistachio & chocolate chip "stick" and an incredibly flaky custard filled "cup".  And of course a pain de campaigne batard and a pair of baguettes.  What a delightful experience. Here's old Morris and me strolling down Rue St. Severin And the lunch for the American contingent.  That's BD girl Dolly sandwiched between my in-laws, themselves book-ended by my wife and me. And the same dopey rabbit seems to still get his hand caught in the Metro train doors, just as he did the first time I rode the Metro back in '89.
We love pie so I made some pie to celebrate Father's Day!These are fried pies. I used a crust that is meant to be very tender and flaky. The filling is creamy tuna in white sauce. They are also very crispy after frying with the crispness that you associate with a croissant.A fast food chain here sells tuna pies which is popular but I'm not a big fan of it. I will be bold and say that these are a million times better! Everyone who tastes this says that I should sell this and it will be a hit. Should I take the bait?And a fried flaky mooncake filled with purple yam paste for dessert! Decadent and delicious!Happy Father's Day to all fathers out there! Maligayang Araw ng mga Ama! Bonne fête des Pères ! 父亲节快乐！
My first blog post is about this wonderfully classic teacake with a rich tradition.  Back when bread dough was prepared at home and then baked in the village baker's oven, bara brith (Welsh translation is mottled or speckled bread) was usually the leftover scraps of dough thrown together and sweetened with dried fruit. It did, however, grow into a standardized loaf consumed during teatime, still filled with an abundance of dried fruit (sultanas, raisins, currants, cranberries...). My version includes raisins, currants, and chopped dates soaked in sweetened Earl grey tea. Enriched with butter, an egg, and orange marmalade, it made for the stickiest dough I've ever worked with. I became a quick convert to the slap and fold technique after failing to knead with other techniques. Michael Brock
I always wondered how this was being done... my first try. I now know what needs to be done to improve on this.  This has no real use other than the wow factor, in my opinion.
I loved the look of Ru's seeded SD so decided to have a go.  I made the exact quantity that she did but because I couldn't find any black sesame seeds I used black chia seeds instead. I refreshed my rye starter that sulks in the fridge without being wanted for weeks on end.  Wednesday at 8:30 am I mixed together 20 g starter + 40 g water + 38 g rye (all I had in the pantry)  and left at RT. 15:30 pm added 13 g water + 13 g rye flour and left to mature. 10 pm mixed the levain as per recipe: 20 g starter + 36 g water + 46 g rye flour.  RT was 22 deg C but it dropped overnight. Next morning: 8:30 toasted seeds separately, ground the flax seed. I added 100 ml boiling water to seed mix ( 17g chia + 42 g sesame seed + 25 g flax seed), covered and left. 11 am.  Autolyse - 279 g flour + 6 g spelt (left over from another bake) + 73 g wholewheat flour + 4 g gluten flour + 234 g wter 13:30 pm.  Added the seed soaker and did a few stretch and folds to roughly mix into dough. then added  101 g of levain and did a few stretch and folds until incorporated.  Instead of sets of stretch and folds I decided to do 150 slap and folds before adding the salt and doing a few initial stretch and folds then about another 10 slap and folds.  Dough felt good 2:45 pm about 6 coil folds (a la Trevor Wilson) then left for 45 minutes.  Repeated this 2 more times before leaving to bulk ferment. 17:30 pm preshaped and left for 15 minutes. Final shaping went well, dough was poofy but easy to manage.  I placed it in a banneton and then in my conservatory (temperatures were quite cool) to 2 hour proof before retarding overnight.  No seeds on outside as hubby prefers it that way. Baked at 240 deg C for 15 mins lid on 15 minutes lid off at 230 deg C. We were going away for the weekend so wrapped and took with us about 11 am.  Crumb shot - taken on Saturday when I cut the loaf. Crumb is moist and this is a very delicious loaf. 2nd bake of the day was  my version of Fieldblend #2 My standard white starter was refreshed on Wednesday - 10 g + 20 g water + 30 g flour and left until mid afternoon I took 15 g of this and added 15 g water + 15 g flour and left. 10 pm mixed 16 g starter + 21g mixed rye & wholewheat bran + 83 g flour + 85 g water and left overnight 11:30 am  Autolyse - mixed 287 g flour + 10 g wholewheat + 115 g rye + 5 g gluten + 271 g water (I held back an additional 45 g water) 1 pm Added 10.4 g salt and 205 g levain and did about 100 slap and folds adding back 30 g more water. 13:45 pm coil folds. This was repeated 2 more times before dough left to bulk ferment. 4:50 pm dough has probably increased 70% so preshaped, rested and at 17:05 shaped and left on bench to start final proof.  At 5:55 pm it was placed in fridge as I had to go out. Next morning baked the same time as Ru's seeded loaf. It is a little bigger than the seeded loaf. Crumb shot This bake day I have concentrated on trying to make sure I have good dough strength so have gone back to slap and folds.  Normally I don't do so many so was keen to see the difference.  Also to try out Trevor's coil folds and see what effect that had. Both doughs were easy to work with.  Partly I think because I am not allowing BF to go so long and partly better gluten development.  Still some way to go I think but not too bad.  I would like more height in the loaves and I think other scoring patterns would help this.    Mind you, Trevor seems to be able to get incredible height even when he does a single score so that is why I think I still have a way to go. Ru"s recipe is really great and next time I will try to find some black sesame and see what difference it makes.  I did add more liquid because of the chia (100 g instead of 55 g as chia can soak up to 5 x its weight if I remember correctly) so hydration will be a bit higher.  When I added the soaker it had absorbed pretty much all the liquid  but it did add a little to the dough.  We cut the loaf the day after (Saturday) and then finished it on Sunday and it was still moist and soft. My Field blend #2 version is a great everyday formula but I would like the crumb to open up a bit.  I didn't add the little bit of yeast that Ken Forkish does in his book, but will next time will try final proofing a bit longer on the bench before retarding (it is working for Dan!!) which means I will need to plan to start mixing the dough earlier in the day.   I would like to give it a bit more "omph!"  too next time but not sure what I will try for this - adding kibbled rye (textural effect) maybe a little carraway? maybe something out of left field..... But pretty happy with how it went. Leslie
Standard recipe, with added mixed seeds sesame, chia, poppy, and 1/6 durum wheat along with the white rye, bread flour and 100% dark rye starter / mother dough.
I was in pursuit of a relatively cheap hobby and basically entered into the Google search bar: "stuff to do for free." One of the many lists I read through suggested I make some bread. One loaf later, and I was hooked! My first loaf, not surprisingly, was based off of the Your First Loaf recipe from this forum. I combined 3 cups of AP flour, 2 tsp of instant yeast, 2 tsp of salt and 1 1/4 cups of water that I heated up in the microwave before adding. I attempted to shape it into a boule, but this was prior to any research on how to properly shape the dough, and it ended up being quite a blob-y looking thing with some ugly scores! The result was some fairly dense (but edible!) bread. I was very pleasantly surprised, and inspired to try again and try implementing some "fancier" methods. For my next loaf, I attempted another white bread, but this time I tried to autolyse the flour (~400g) and water (~300g) for 45 minutes. I think maybe I did it wrong, honestly, or had too much flour, because the flour never became fully saturated with the water and remained quite dry with a lot of leftover flour and dry chunks in the bowl. Not sure if my mixing (by hand) was inadequate or I just had too much flour in the mix. Regardless, I let it "autolyse" for 45 minutes then added the yeast (approx 1 tsp because I didn't realize that's all I had left in the house) and salt (2 tsp). Tried to slap and fold for around 7 minutes. I almost felt as if the yeast was not enough to start the fermentation process, because this loaf sat for over 3 hours and barely rose at all! I decided to throw it in the oven anyway, expecting an inedible loaf, but after 45 minutes in a 375 degree oven, this came out: I didn't even bother attempting to shape it because I thought it was a goner! Anyway, I was surprised by the interesting color/flour swirls in the crust and was pretty pumped by the holier crumb. My last two loaves of the weekend were the ones where I felt like I was finally a little comfortable with the process. I weighed my ingredients, shaped fairly well, and attempted to score my loaves and each turned out decent! Loaf Three had 360g KA AP flour, 250g 90 degree water, 2 tsp salt, 2 tsp instant yeast. Mixed together, slapped and folded for approximately 10 minutes, bulk fermentation for 90 minutes, de-gassed, preshaped and proofed for 40 minutes, then in the oven for 40 minutes at 375 degrees: Loaf Four had 360g KA AP flour, 250g water heated to 90 degrees, 2 tsp salt, 2 tsp instant yeast, and 1/2 tbs melted butter. Mixed together, slapped and folded for approximately 10 minutes, bulk fermentation for 90 minutes, de-gassed, preshaped, proofed for approximately 40 minutes, scored and in the 375 degree oven for 40 minutes: Overall, I'm happy with my output. Everything was edible, nothing mind-blowing, but I had some toast and some sandwiches and some dinner bread that I made myself, and was very proud! GOALS FOR THE NEXT FOUR LOAVES: If any of you expert bakers have any pointers, tips or tricks, corrections or comments, I gladly welcome them. I'm happy to be starting my baking journey!
Since going on a 1 day French baking course at Christmas I have been keen to continue my croissant baking journey. There are many blogs on here already but I wanted a place to be able to track my progress and perhaps help other's in the meantime - even if it's just to show how not to do it! The recipe I use is from the Bread Ahead baking book. 500g strong bread flour (I can't get strong bread flour so I used bread flour which I think has 13% protein here) 12g sea salt 55g sugar 40g softened unsalted butter 30g fresh yeast 140g full fat milk 140g water 250g butter 1 egg for the eggwash I have had varying degrees of success the 3 times prior to this blog post. The first batch I made were OK - some honeycomb structure but not as airy as I'd like them to be. You can see them here. Changes I've made since that batch are leaving the dough in the fridge just a few hours rather than overnight and proving for longer. This week I've made 2 batches - 1 is actually still proving. The first batch this week turned out quite bready - although some bizarrely more bready than others even though they're from the same batch. There was a little evidence of layers in some of them but not many. I'm sure the butter was too warm during the laminating so it's been absorbed by the dough. I had sliced the batter and made the butter block by rolling that out - quite thin due to advise from another baker on TFL. I'm now wondering if this only made it easier for the dough to absorb the butter when it got too warm? After some more reading on TFL I decided I was going to make some changes to the batch that are currently proving. I decided only to do half the recipe so that I wasn't using so many ingredients. Also given the hot and humid climate I: - beat the block of butter to shape in some cling film and then rolled it to size, rather than slicing it and then rolling it - cooled the butter before locking it in as I think that previously my butter has been far too warm - put the dough back in the fridge after the lock in for 15mins and put the rolling pin in the freezer - as far as I can see it this was a very important step given the climate - rolled and turned it and then put it in the fridge for 1h 30min until I'd completed 3 turns (envelope fold) - I will do this every time from now on - each time I'd put the rolling pin back in the freezer alongside some ice blocks which I used to cool my counter down for 10mins before I rolled out the dough - I will continue doing this as it seemed to help - left it in the fridge overnight - I began to roll out the dough but had to put it back in the fridge several times (for between 5 and 15 mins) before I'd reached the correct dimensions - will probably increase the time it's in the fridge between rolling out - I cut my croissants and began stretching and shaping them, however, by the time I'd got to the remaining 4 they had warmed up too much so I put them in the fridge for about 10 mins - next time I'll cut all the triangles out and then refrigerate them all for 15mins before shaping - I egg washed them and now they are proving...update to follow! Update: So I proved them for 3 hours (maybe up to 3hr 15min ish) and then cooked them in the oven at 180C (although I turned the oven up to 200C just after I put them in to give them a bit of extra heat). The oven is enormous and doesn't cook that well. They were in there for 25mins and were still only light golden brown. You can see the layers on the outside of the croissants but the crumb isn't as open and I can't really work out why. They taste very light though and aren't as dense as the batch from earlier in the week. More photos here. Is it over proved? Is the butter still too warm? I made a batch in March that came out much much more open but I wasn't nearly as cautious in that batch with keeping the butter cold and was probably more heavy handed. I also proved that batch for about the same time but cooked it in my countertop electric oven rather than the gas oven. The electric oven only gets up to 180C. Could that be a difference that counts? You can see photos from previous attempts here. I'd be grateful for any feedback anyone can offer.
Well, I'm back with a new loaf of bread! This time I wanted to experiment something new and I decided to mix two of my favorite flours to create what I thought would be the perfect loaf to me. I choose to go for 20% whole rye flour (that I think it's the same thing as dark rye in US) and 15% whole khorasan flour and all the process was smooth and relatively easy. But...there is a but! I over proofed even this loaf, I think due to the fact that the temperature, as I said in previous posts, is high up here and it is so difficult to adjust to this humidity, too. I tried to proof it less at ambient temperature (let's say 5 hours in total, counting also the earlier stages) and then I let it sit in the fridge for about 8 hours! But when I looked at it it was going over the basket and it was full of air as a balloon. I'm still really happy with the result because I love this type of crumb and the flavors are fab! I really love this mix. I, indeed, have to better my skills in reducing the proofing time because sometimes I think that the retarding time in the fridge it is the most important thing but in reality it's the bread that decides and you have to go with it and not to fear changing your timings. As I said previously this is a learning process and I love to make mistakes that allow me to better and to think about this fantastic art! Now the formula: 100gr whole rye flour 50gr whole khorasan flour 350gr type 1 flour (here in Italy) 410gr water 10gr pin hymalaian salt 100gr leaven (20gr type 1 starter, 40gr water, 40gr type 1 flour) handful of poppy seeds for the top The process was the same as the last post I did, so I don't want to bother you! This is the crumb shot: as I said, I love the texture and the crust is crunchy due to the fact that I added poppy seeds (they are a burst of flavor and texture and they are super cute). It is the perfect bread to make sandwiches and bruschetta with and for this reason I can't complain. But next time I really want to have the proof right and to get a nice spring in the oven: in order to get a taller loaf but also to try to achieve a good open crumb (it is a challenge at this point). I hope to read your feedbacks soon and I thank you in advance for reading me! Happy baking, Beatrice XX
This stollen is an amazing thing: rich, heavy, and fruity. The dough is different from anything else I know and a little tricky to work with. Before I give you the recipe and the technique, I will start by telling you a little about the history of Dresden Stollen. Seeing that there are very different stollen recipes around, I think you need this little introduction to understand how the Dresden stollen is different and why it is worth making, despite all the effort.In Saxony (the region in the East of Germany, where Dresden is), stollen has been a tradition Christmas bread for centuries (the first written documents about stollen are from the 1329). At that time, however, stollen was a light, yeasted bread, containing nothing but flour, water, yeast and sometimes oil. It was sold and eaten during he pre-Christmas period of Advent fast. Saxony was then catholic, so the use of any richer ingredients such as butter or milk was strictly forbidden. The Saxon rulers, however, were apparently dissatisfied with their Advent bread, so they applied to the pope for a permission to use butter in their stollen. The pope allowed this in 1491, on the condition that they atone for their sin by donating liberally to the church. Although meant only for the rulers and gentry, the pope's permission was quickly applied with much more liberation. Maybe to compensate for centuries of butter-free fasting, the Saxons transformed the stollen into a rich, buttery bread stuffed with fruits. No longer a fast meal, the stollen became a Christmas celebration bread. After a while Saxony turned protestant, but the stollen remained. Of course, with its centuries of tradition, the title "Dresden Stollen" was soon used for trading purposes, unfortunately not always with high-quality products. Since the beginning of the 20th century, the traditional Dresden stollen bakeries fought against the on-slough of so-called Dresden stollen. Today, "Dresdner Stollen" is a registered trademark and only selected backers from Dresden area can use it, provided that their stollen meet criteria with regard to the minimum amount of butter and dried fruits.Enough of history, let's look at the bread. A real Dresden stollen contains at least 500g Butter and 650g sultanas per 1000g flour. This makes it extremely heavy and rich. Furthermore, the stollen is traditionally heavily coated in icing sugar. The bread needs to ripe for at least 3 weeks in order to develop its flavours and texture and keeps in proper conditions easily for several months. The recipe that I have here is based on a century old recipe for Dresden Christmas stollen, that Dresden bakeries use as a foundation. Of course, I have adapted it to suit our tastes. You are free to do the same. Just what ever you do, do not cut down the fat! Without the fat, the stollen will never keep as long and it will not develop the proper texture and taste. The same goes for the amount of fruits. You can play with the sugar though, for example leave out the sugar coat (I prefer our stollen uncoated). Right, enough said, here is the recipe:Ingredients:1000 g flour (fine, weak flour; all purpose flour should do nicely)250 g cream 42 g fresh yeast (or 14 g dried yeast)500 g butter (or 450g butter and 50g lard or tallow)1 g ground mace0,5 g ground cinnamon0,5 g ground cardamomzest of 1 lemon150 g sugar (I use Muscovado whole-cane sugar)50 g candied lemon peel (instead I make my own by soaking peel from two lemons in honey for several days)150 g candied orange peel (instead, I soak peel from 4-5 oranges in honey)500 g sultanas250 g currants100 g rum (optional, I use Amaretto instead)200 g ground almonds+ extra butter (approx. 250 g)+ extra fine castor sugar (approx. 100 g)+ extra icing sugar (at least 250 g)0. Save the dateIt's important not to start baking stollen too late. My personal experience with this recipe is that they need at least 4 weeks, ideally 6 weeks before you cut into them. Really! We always cut our first stollen on the first Advent Sunday, so I bake my first batch 10 weeks before Christmas. I bake my second and sometimes third batch about 5-6 weeks before Christmas, partly for us and partly as presents for friends. 0. PrefermentThe stollen dough is very heavy and it will need a strong yeast activity to raise it. For this purpose, I like to preferment a portion of the flour. I take 300g of the flour, break in 21g yeast, and knead it with 250g cream. I leave it to ferment for 1 hour by room temperaure and than for 12-24 hours in the fridge. You can also use sourdough in the preferment. I have successfully baked sourdough-only stollen, you just need to let them rise longer.0. SoakingPlace the sultanas and currents in a large bowl. If you are using alcohol, pour it over the fruit. Add enough boiling water to cover the fruit. Leave to soak for at least 30 minutes, but best over night. It is important to soak the fruit even if you are not using alcohol, or else it will burn in the oven. Don't forget to drain the fruit well before you start making the dough to make it as dry as possible.1. DoughI sieve the flour onto a working surface (this definitely does not work in a bowl). Break in the remaining 21g of yeast (you can leave this out, just adjust the rising time). Rub the lemon zests into the sugar and mix the sugar into the flour, together with the mace, cinnamon, and cardamom. If you are wondering about the small amounts, the stollen is not supposed to taste very spicy. However, this is your stollen, so you can add any spices you like. Cut the preferment into small pieces and distribute it on the edges of your flour mound and do the same with the butter/lard. Now comes the kneading. Be warned, that you will need about 30 minutes to knead the dough. You can try it in your mixere, but make sure your mixer can take it. Better invest the time or coax a physically strong friend or relative into helping. Start by taking a few pieces of the preferment and the butter and kneading them together. As you do this, the dough-lump in your hands will turn sticky. Place it in the middle of your flour mound and knead it there, until so much flour has been incorporated that it's dry again. Now take some more preferment and butter and knead them in your lump. This will make it sticky again, so add flour. And so on and so on. At some point, the dough-lump may become difficult to handle. Feel free to cut and put aside about two thirds of it and continue kneading with the rest. You can put the pieces together in the end. Do not be tempted into adding more flour or any liquids. Trust me, just keep kneading, it will all be well in the end. As you work, the kitchen will be slowly filled with the smell of lemon zest and the spices - Christmas is on the way!2. FruitsYou are tired, your fingers ache and you are a proud owner of a homogeneous dough lump that reminds you of short-bread dough. Congratulations, let's add the fruit. Take your drained sultanas and currants and mix them with the ground almonds. This will help soak up the remaining liquid. Mix them with the candied orange and lemon peel and pour the whole lot on your working surface. You might have the urge to check the recipe now, because you think you have too much fruit. But it really can be incorporated into you dough-lump. First, cut the dough-lump into 5 pieces. Start by working the first piece into the fruit. As the fruit is wet, this will make it all turn into a strange paste. Keep adding piece by piece, until the whole lot is incorporated. Don't worry if you feel more like making mudpies. Place the whole mass into a bowl and clean your working surface with a dough scraper. Now evaluate the dough. Is it like a soft short-bread or cookie dough? Than you are done with it. If it's too wet and soft (probably it will be), dust the working surface with flour, turn the dough onto it and carefully work in a little more flour. Not too much, though, the dough should be just about manageable. You won't need to make anything fancy with it, so as long as it does not stick to the work surface or your hands like crazy, it's fine. 3. Divide, form, and riseDivide the dough into 2-5 pieces. For us, I prefer to make two large stollen. This size apparently has a positive influence on the texture of the stollen later on. But you can make several smaller stollen, too, for example as gifts. Just don't forget to adjust the baking time. Form each stollen into a rough, high log. Just pat it into shape - no rolling, no stretching. Just a note here: the traditional Dresden stollen has no almond paste inside. With all the dried fruit and its sugar coat, I also think that it does not need it. But it's your stollen, so if you like, add it now. Put the formed stollen on a baking sheet with baking paper (make sure the stollen are far enough apart) and let it rise for about 2 hours (more, if you are using only sourdough or less yeast). The stollen will become a little puffy, nothing more. It will definitely not double. 4. Score and bakeThere is a traditional way of forming a Dresden stollen. I use a different, simple way used for stollen from Thuringia (another region in Germany). It's easier and the stollen are less flat, so they are also moister. Basically, you just make a log and then you score it with a single cut all the away down the stollen's back. That's it. I score the stollen directly before putting it into the oven. I don't preheat the oven, just pop it in and bake it at 180°C for approx. 1-1,5 hours. Keep a watchful eye on the stollen. Cover it with aluminium foil if it has turned brown before its time and adjust the time according to the size of the stollen. 5. CoatThis is an optional step. Traditional stollen is heavily coated in sugar. If you want to coat the stollen, brush it with liquid butter (as much as the stollen can soak up) immediately after taking it out of the oven. Than sprinkle it heavily with fine castor sugar. The castor sugar will soak up any access butter. Wait for the stollen to cool and sprinkle it with a very thick layer of icing sugar. As I wrote, I skip this step. Firstly, I find the coated stollen too sweet and secondly it makes a mess when storing. Alternatively, it is also possible to store uncoated stollen and brush it with butter and coat it in sugar right before cutting into it.6. StoreThe stollen has to be stored for at least 4 weeks (I recommend 6) before cutting into it. If you cut it earlier, you will be disappointed. Cutting it later is even better. Stollen store best in an old fashioned cool celler, with high humidity. If you don't have such a cellar, you can store stollen outside in wooden boxes provided that your climate is cool enough (that's what I do). Otherwise store the stollen in the coolest room of your house, but not in the fridge. Some people like to freeze the stollen, I don't think its necessary and it has a negative impact on the texture. If you are storing stollen in a cellar or outside, simply wrap it in cotton cloth and put it in a wooden box, so that it can breathe. Otherwise wrap it well in a plastic or aluminium foil. The idea is that if you cannot provide an environment with high humidity, such as cellar or outside, you should prevent the stollen from drying out. That's it, now wait.7. EatingIf you cut into a stollen 2-3 weeks after baking, you will be disappointed. It will taste fine, but the crumb will be far too dry. Don't give up and put the stollen away again and wait a little longer. The texture will change over time and after six weeks it will have a short-bread-like crumb and the taste will be a mixture of spices and fruits, all rolled into a buttery, sweet bliss.So to sum up, a Dresden stollen is not hard to bake. All it takes are good quality ingredients, some muscle and a lot of patience. The reward is a truly unusual bread. Although I am not German and grew up baking other Christmas goodies, stollen has become to me a personification of Christmas. You take the best, you do your best, you wait for the occasion, and then you enjoy it in full.
I was led to Swedish baker Jan Hedh's book Artisan Bread by Dan Lepard's recommendation on TFL. I owe him thanks for that as it full of great formulae and beautifully photographed by Klas Andersson. There is lots in it to inspire. One of my favourite Hedh breads is a lemon bread flavoured with lemon zest and green olive oil (pp.126-7). Created by Hedh when lead baker on a Swedish cruise ship, this aromatic bread was designed to work well with fish dishes. It can be made in the shape of a lemon-shaped, small dinner bread or a more traditional round roll. The breads are dusted in yellow semolina flour during the second proof, to make them even more lemon-like. Hedh's recipe gives enough for a small batch, In fact this is one of the few breads that I can batch bake in an hour after preheating my small domestic oven, baking 3 dinner breads in the first firing and 4-6 round rolls in the second. The bread has a great texture. It is moist but remains firm even when sliced thinly. It takes savoury toppings well without bending or getting soggy, making it also ideal for open sandwiches and canapés. We have enjoyed it with fish dishes and also topped it with tomato, oil and vinegar or tangy cheese and pickles. It is also good dipped simply in olive oil. However one of my favourite ways to eat it is sliced thinly with no accompaniments, so that the subtle and delicious lemon taste can be enjoyed to the full. Hedh's original lemon bread is a yeasted bread made with a preferment of yellow durum wheat flour (grown traditionally on the Swedish island of Ven), and light rye flour with stone ground, strong wheat flour added to the final, machine-mixed dough. The version I am writing up here is my adaptation, a sourdough made with semolato, whole rye flour and wholemeal flour, which is hand mixed. Some pictures of the different stages plus a chart of the adapted formula and process follow: Sourdough Wholemeal Lemon Bread: Adaptation of Jan Hedh RecipeThis bread is flavoured with lemon zest rather than lemon juice. This results in subtle highnotes in the final bread, rather than a widespread lemon taste. It is well worth getting organic and unwaxed lemons to zest if available. When grated and mixed with the flour the lovely aroma also fills the kitchen! The wholemeal, olive oil infused dough has a lovely, silky consistency and is good to work with. I have baked this bread several times. The original instructions make no reference to scoring the bread. I made the first batch without slashes and they came out well. However the picture in the book shows a loaf with an open top. I later read in the Introduction that Hedh proofs and bakes some of his breads with the seam side upwards. The loaf then splits along the seam, giving it an attractive rustic look. My shaping skills are not yet so good that I can prevent an unscored loaf rupturing elsewhere. I now normally score the breads with one long stroke along the top and this has worked well to date. I was concerned that a predominantly whole grain formula at lowish hydration might produce too dense a crumb and loaf. I imagine that the loaves might rise higher when Hedh's original formula is used. However the preferment seems to work well with sourdough as well as baker's yeast and I have been able to get quite an open crumb and good rise for the size of loaf and type of flour used. My sourdough starters are quite feisty but the relatively low levels of starter in the preferment and final dough have meant that the overall fermentation has taken place without the dough losing elasticity. The amount of starter and fermentation times I give are relevant to my own situation. I am realizing more and more now that with sourdough starters any formula is just a guideline! Please feel free to adjust this to suit your own starters. The quantities below are for 4 dinner breads: With this formula I used a wholemeal starter at approximately 66% hydration. I have made this bread successfully with wholemeal flours from Dove's Farm, Waitrose and Bacheldre Mill. Bacheldre Mill was the most fruity and aromatic. I used Dallari semolato because it was the only one available locally at the time but would prefer to use DeCecco, a brand that is sometimes available, also recommended by nicobdv. I estimate overall hydration including starter hydration at 530/945 = 56% but I'm always open to correction! 650g Make the preferment approximately 12 hours before baking, normally the evening before: Mix a small amount of starter with water to form a paste Add the rest of the water to the starter mixture Combine the flours and pour the water and starter over the flour. Mix for 8-10 minutes in preferred fashion. (I 'air knead' in the manner of Andrew Whitley in order to incorporate the starter fully) Cover and leave in an oiled container in the fridge Wash and zest lemons, mix into flour Add preferment to flour Dissolve second lot of starter in second lot of water and pour over flour Mix by preferred method for 3 minutes Add oil and salt and mix by preferred method for 8 minutes. (I air knead for 8 minutes then perform one stretch and fold on the bench). Make sure that all new starter and preferment are mixed in well. Mix for another 7 minutes if needed, to form an elastic dough. Place in a lightly oiled, covered container I bake the dinner breads for 10 minutes at C250 with steam, open door to releas steam and turn the oven down to C230 for the rest of the bake Check internal temperature after another 12 minutes, bake for further increments of 3-5 minutes, if needed, until internal temperature of around C90 is reached and crust is an attractive light golden colour. Jan Hedh recommends baking rolls for around 12 minutes
I finally got the color with 10 gram flowers steeped in 250 ml of hot water.  I compromised brighter hue by using higher % of whole grain flours but I am happy with the turmeric contrast. I would love to see larger holes in the crumb but not succeeding somehow...
My planned Solstice bake has not eventuated, it may still in a few days time.  Still this bake started on 20th, and finished today.  My very first 100% Rye bread - Madelaine Jude's Danish Rugbrod.  Here in NZ,  it is the winter solstice so maybe it is fitting. 20th June 9 am - 20 g Rye starter + 20 g water + 20 g rye flour leave on bench 8 pm Add 60 g water + 60 g rye flour and leave overnight 21st June 8 am Add 60 g water + 60 g rye flour and leave on bench.  Cover 125 g whole rye berrieswith boiling water and leave to soak. 11:15 am Mill 65 g chocolate malted grain (I think it is probably barley, it should have been rye but that is all I could get) on the coarsest setting on my Mockmill.  It had a few chunks but milled quite fine and quite easily. Add 55 g boiling water to 62 g choc malted grain + 63 g kibbled rye, cover and leave.  It was like a very thick paste but almost crumbly.  Smelt like dark dark coffee. 7 pm Cook the soaking grains for about 12 minutes until tender but had to add a little water. Cover and leave. Mix the final levain - Add 80 g water and 80 g rye flour and leave on bench overnight. 22nd June 9 am Mix together 150 g rye flour + 400 g levain + 15 g malt extract + the rye berries/kibbled malted grain mix (about 175 g).  This was such hard work, no way was it wet enough.  Double check recipe.  No additional water.  I decided to keep adding water until it became as author said  "stiff dropping consistency" - this took about an additional 140 g. By this time I am exhausted!! really really difficult to mix by hand - all I wanted to do was have a lie down!! Here is dough just before I put it in the pan. No salt?? double checked but no salt, ok.  Transfer to metal bread form, smooth top with wet spatula and leave to double. It took 4 hours even though kitchen was probably at about 20 - 21 deg C. Covered and tented bread form with foil and baked for 30 minutes at 220 deg C and 30 minutes at 180 deg C.  Internal temperature was only 170 deg F so I put it back for  another 30 minutes but uncovered. Internal temperature now 208 deg F so all good. I will follow instructions and wrap bread and leave it for 2 days before slicing.  This was on my husband's wish list as he had spent some time in Denmark as a young man and wanted me to replicate the bread.  Time will tell if this is a true replication to the Danish bread he remembers. It was quite a different bake for me, will post crumb once we cut it. Leslie
This photo was taken at dawn a few days ago. It is a field of heritage Marquis wheat grown by Cedar Isle Farm. They have carefully nurtured an initial very small seed stock over a number of years and now have enough seed to grow Marquis wheat for a modest commercial harvest.  I saw this photo in their Late Spring Update e-newsletter and wanted to share it with the TFL community if for no other reason than it's a beautiful picture!  Here is the accompanying excerpt from the newsletter: Late Spring Update 2018 " ...planted our saved seed of heritage Marquis wheat again this spring, and the seedlings are flourishing. Take another look at the photograph (at the top), taken at dawn. Those tiny drops of moisture are not dew (condensation of moisture from the air), but guttation.  When the soil moisture is high, and there is little transpiration from the leaves because daily photosynthesis hasn't yet begun, water can accumulate in the roots, creating a slight root pressure that forces moisture to exude through special glands in the leaves.  Cool, eh?Happy Spring from all of us at Cedar Isle Farm!Jim " Cedar Isle Farm - Organic Grains CSA
This is a keeper! I mixed: Buckwheat, BF, Semolina, graham, white whole wheat and little bit of malted flour. 20% of plum levain and 80% water... The crumb is very soft with medium openness but the best part is the smell!
This is a version of my go to hamburger/hot dog bun/rolls formula.  Last time I made this with fresh milled rye so this time I used fresh milled whole wheat instead. As usual they didn't disappoint.  I made these around 160 grams so these will fit the biggest burger you dare to use.  They are nice and soft and flavorful and perfect for burgers, sandwiches or just with some eggs and cheese for breakfast. Formula Download the BreadStorm formula here. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I usually do this the night before. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours,  and water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for at least one hour.  Next, add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), cream cheese, softened butter and mix on low for 5 minutes.    Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 hour.  Remove the dough and shape into rolls around 160 grams each.  Cover the rolls with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap Sprayed with cooking spray and let rise at room temperature for 1 1/2 - 2 hours.  If you want seeds, brush with an egg wash and sprinkle on your toppings.  I used poppy seeds and smoked sesame seeds. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 500 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. After you place the rolls in the oven and add your steam lower the temperature to 445 F.   Bake for 25 minutes or until the rolls are nice and brown. Take the rolls out of the oven when done and let them cool on a bakers rack for as long as you can resist.
Someone somewhere on the site posted the suggestion of a summer solstice bread challenge. This is my answer to that call. It's a sourdough summer solstice sun twirl with Ontario Maple Syrup, Quebec wild blueberry jam, sugared almond slivers and topped with cinnamon sugar. Happy summer to all..
I have now made seven loaves of bread! The learning curve is steep but I'm excited to keep improving. Over the last few days I made an "experimental" bread (which was really just an adjusted version of the suggested TFL first loaf) and my first recipe out of Ken Forkish's FWSY, the Saturday White. First came my "experimental" white: As with the other bread I attempted to autolyse, I found within my limited timeframe there was not much growth/increase in volume during either BF or proofing process. I found it was a little harder to shape and maneuver in and out of the bowl due to increased hydration %. Scoring was unsuccessful, probably not deep enough. Also, because I stretched and folded during the BF process and baked the bread "seam" side down, there were natural rips/seams on the bottom of the bread versus where I tried to create the weak spots on top. Pros: good oven spring I think, better color on the crust by wetting it before baking. I found the bottom of the crumb to be a little doughy, as seen above and below. Could have used a little more time in the oven I think. Next was my longest bread bake yet, the Saturday White! The OG recipe calls for placing the divided dough into bannetons which I do not have, so instead I placed them in oiled bowls and re-shaped them before putting in the oven. Put one loaf in the DO and one on a cookie tray, each "seam" side up. I had some difficulty with the poke test due to the moisture content of the dough, it stuck to my finger and I was unable to tell if it was properly proofed. One on the left was cooked on the tray, the one on the right was cooked in a dutch oven. What a difference! Was fun to run a little side by side experiment and see the difference in color. My first baby ear!!! The bottom of the loaf that I cooked on the cookie sheet burned. The bottom of the loaf I cooked in the dutch oven did not visibly burn, but was noticeably difficult to cut and bite through. Again, I encountered a bit of the bread that was still fairly "doughy"? Not sure if I just need to cook longer or what my issue may be there. Goal for next time:
knowing that you are dying to find out what it will look like inside and the love that goes into making it!  Kat Everyone was so encouraging about the previous loaf that I tried again this morning.and see how consistent I can be.....again same old 71% white and this time I scored right by the side of the loaf rather than the middle....have not cut it yet.....:D Hi All, So sorry to be too late for solstice bake...I had 10 teenage boys in the garden on that evening for a World Cup football barbecue and baked lots of bread instead....it is amazing what boys can manage to eat in a short period of time!!!! So, this is my go to 71% hydration mainly white loaf with a tiny bit of WW flour and they managed to have 3 of those with their sausages and burgers!
Re-visited Forkish's Saturday White recipe today after a slightly disappointing attempt yesterday. The following chart shows my ingredients, process, and an interpretation of the given instructions (with alterations due to limitations in gear, as I don't yet have bannetons): As I baked the first loaf, the second was in its proofing bowl in the fridge. The first loaf: With this dough, I tried to export from my proofing bowl onto a piece of parchment paper so I could carefully slide it into the hot DO, but it lost all shape and I gave up and basically threw the misshapen pile of dough in there and it ended up in more of a rectangle shape. Not mad at it, I still think it's pretty, but the part I am bummed about is that small little doughy section in the middle of the loaf! I feared I was underbaking slightly and so gave the next loaf an extra five minutes. The second loaf: I was thrilled to see this come out of the oven! With this dough I attempted to re-shape on the counter immediately before throwing it into the oven seam side up, which created what I think are some beautiful natural tears and little ears, but my guess is that last minute shaping perhaps created the large holes which are present in the crumb? I wanted to avoid the random blob shape of the first loaf, but ended up with some un-intended caves. Side by side comparison of the two. Small improvements every bake I think so far! Having fun with it. :)
I'm constantly frustrated by any amount of left over starter. It seems so wasteful. So most of the time I simply place whatever's leftover into the jar with the rest of Charlie - my loyal starter. This weekend I made a solstice sun twirl bread and had way too much starter left over. I had originally planed to make some other bread but our weekend plans changed and I knew I wouldn't have the time to properly deal with it. So I thought about using the starter as a biga of sorts. I took 260g of 100% hydration starter that was probably about two or three hours past peak and added 200 grams of unbleached flour, 88 grams of 105 degree water and 5 grams of salt. I gave them all a quick mix and threw it all into the mixer for 15+ minutes to fully come together. It was sticky but seemed fine. I shaped it into a ball and placed it into a clean bowl. I gave it two stretch and folds in the first hour to help with structure and then let it increase 2.5x in size over the next few hours. I gave it a quick shape and placed it into a basket.  About 90 minutes later I placed it into the combo cooker to bake. I probably should have just baked it right away as the finger dent test told me were were just about there - but life got in the way. There's really no reason why I gave it a fendue shape other than because I could.. and think it looks cool when baked.. I clearly didn't' get any significant oven bloom. I think next time I'd give it a shorter bulk and longer proof. Just getting it out of the bowl took a lot of air out of the dough. By switching to a longer proof, short bulk I could have saved many of the openness (I think). That would have at the least kept more air in the bread. I guess I could have also added (I know this sounds sacrilegious) a pinch of  instant dry yeast in with the flour that morning to help the oven bloom. It's completely edible basic 'white bread'.. a bit bland and a bit dry, but perfectly fine.  Especially with a few fresh tomatoes, basil and olive oil! And a fair attempt at not throwing away starter. Any and all recommendations welcomed. !
Using a recipe posted in 2013 by d_a_kelly for Panettone a tre impasti in June. My adaptation was to use mango yeast water as the water to build the first impasto and then a small amount ( 5gr) of stiff rye starter in the second dough build. The first dough made Saturday late morning, the second late evening Saturday. The last build made Sunday morning and baked when it had tripled ( or perhaps 4x) in a loaf pan. Hand kneaded each step. Used Montana Flour and Grain unbleached white flour. It is a high gluten wheat flour. Baked it when it had risen past the pan lip. It was still growing. Could have used a bigger pan. Great oven spring. May not be able to cool it fully before the family riots. Used vanilla extract + orange bitters to simulate fiori de sicillia, and it smells good.
This bake was quite a change in method for me.  Normally I mix, bulk ferment and shape during the day, cold retard overnight and bake first thing in the morning.  This time I started late in the day. I had some levain left from another bake so just added a bit more flour, some bran and left it to mature.  My formula was a simple white 74% hydration sourdough with 8% prefremented flour.  I made 2 loaves, 1 with a pinch of ascorbic acid (to see if it made a difference) and 1 standard.  This was just something to try after DanAyo had brought this topic up recently.  The loaves were both 550 g. both loaves treated exactly the same. 5:30 pm Mix flour and water for a 1 hour autolyse, Ascorbic acid treated dough felt very wet and I worried a bit. 6:30 pm added salt and levain, gently dimpled levain and did a few stretch and folds followed by 80 slap and folds (I am still working on getting good strength in my doughs). 7 pm 15 stretch and folds in the bowl followed by 4 of Trevor's coil folds. This was repeated 3 more times and just before 9 pm I placed dough in covered bowls in my conservatory with windows cracked open. Overnight temperature was forecast to be 10 - 11 deg C and I kept my fingers crossed that the bulk ferment would hold till this morning.  Both doughs were very soft but had come together well. 8:15 am this morning I preshaped dough, rested 15 minutes then shaped.  the ascorbic acid treated dough felt and looked a little puffier.  The dough was proofed for about an hour and a half only.  The heating was on in the house so room temperature was probably about 21 deg C,  I prefer scoring cold dough so this was a bit of a challenge and it looked quite flat as it went into the oven.  Standard bake 15 mins lid on in DO and 15 mins lid off at about (230 deg C) 475 deg F. Left hand loaf is treated with ascorbic acid. Ok, they look good, sprang very well in the oven.  Not a great deal between the two in fact. Late afternoon I cut the loaves to slice and freeze and got quite a surprise. Top slice is the standard bake, the lower slice is from the Ascorbic acid treated dough.  I am a happy camper. Didn't set out to achieve this but will definitely attempt this again.  Not sure if it was the long long bulk ferment at relatively cool temperatures or the slap and folds or something else all together.  No retardation either.  I don't make many straight white breads anymore and while I don't always want a crumb like this, it is really fun to have achieved it. Earlier in the morning I had baked 2 loaves of Trevor Wilson's European Peasant bread a l Danni3113.  I remembered to fix the levain % and this too turned out really well.  I won't write out method etc it is a repeat of an earlier bake. Crumb Must admit this is a very nice bread indeed.  I mucked up the actual weights of the differing grains but I think I got it about right in the end.  It didn't matter, it tastes wonderful and we really had to hold back at lunchtime. I think I need a rest now, I have "baked up a storm" over the last few days but we have an interesting selection in the freezer. happy baking everyone Leslie
Lucy loves Haiku and between bakes she thinks up some good ones.   Between bakes I thought we should all give it a try and see if our bread improves. Just add them on here as comments.  Here is Lucy's first shot and then mine but there will be more as time allows.
At 90% hydration, dough was quite tacky to shape. I thought it was well fermented and expected some elasticity but no such luck.... scoring was ok but couldn’t go deep at all. Quite disappointed to see a muffin top but the crumb was so nice... perfect for my 88 year old mom’s weak teeth. It was very soft and spongy like.  I incorporated natto and black sesame seeds at the second stretch and fold and did lamination expecting huge holes... but that didn’t happen either!!
A week or so ago Ru posted her seeded sourdough, and I felt inspired to give the recipe a try. The recipe is unusual for me in that with the sole exception of nine grams of salt there are no additional ingredients on the second day.  No more flour.  Not even any new water. The night before, I combined 20 g of starter, 40 g of whole wheat, and 36 g of water for the levain.  (Ru uses a rye starter; mine is a 50/50 combo of AP and whole wheat fed on a 1:2:2 basis.)  I toasted 15 g of black sesame seeds, 40 g of white sesame seeds, and 25 g of flax seeds and then poured 66 g of boiling water on the mix.  (The 66 g exceeds Ru's 55 g, but seems about right.)  Lastly, I mixed 330 g of bread flour, 80 g of whole wheat, and 296 g of water into a somewhat shaggy mass.  After a little time in the fridge for the seeds and dough mix, all sat out for the overnight. Just before 9:00 am the next morning, I combined the salt, levain, seeds, and dough and repeated Ru's four sets of mixing (2-3 min.) with ten-minute rest intervals.  After fifty minutes I did a stretch-and-fold, and there were three of those sessions.  After the third S&F the dough sat in my cool kitchen as the afternoon warmed a bit.  Eventually the dough went onto the countertop around 5:45 pm, was pre-shaped, and had a thirty minute bench rest.  After final shaping into a batard, the dough went into a banneton.  I expected a slow rise, but the wee beasties had sprung into action, and by 8:00 pm I sensed the need for refrigeration.  My intent had been to retard overnight, but I could see as the night wore on that waiting until the next morning to bake could be a mistake.  By late evening the dough nearly filled the banneton, and the poke test produced dents that sprung back, but not fully.  Time to heat the oven. The dough went into the oven shortly before midnight.  The first twenty minutes were at 475 degrees (F), and then I reduced to 450 degrees.  The total bake time was forty minutes, and the loaf weighed 815 g. A fun loaf to make, and the seeds definitely add something both in taste and texture.  My wife tends to like seeded loaves, so I am waiting for her reaction when she has a chance to try some tonight.
Autolyse for a while - as long as it took me to pit the cherries and weigh the other add ins: Mix in to autolyse: After 30 mins do Stretch and fold in the tub Wait another 30 mins - mix in add ins and do another SF - one more SF at +30 mins Bulk ferment until double Divide and shape - rest overnight in fridge In the morning I will bake in Dutch Ovens The dough smells divine....hoping the bread will be.
I finally had a chance to use the blue pea flowers I bought a month or so ago after seeing several people on the Facebook bread groups as well as here recently post their versions.  Naturally I had to try and put my own spin on it. For my first attempt it came out pretty good, but I almost had a disaster in the making.  The formula below is not 100% accurate since I forgot that I used extra water to soak the flowers in and in my haste to mix up the 2 dough's needed and cook dinner at the same time I never re-weighed the water :(.  This caused me to add some extra French flour and a bit of Rye flour so I didn't end up with soup.  The dough was still very slack but I think if you follow my formula below it should be fine. I made 2 different dough's using one starter.  The blue dough was mostly made with the KAF French style flour with a bit of rye per above and yellow roasted carrots.  The second dough was fresh milled whole wheat with fresh milled rye and purple roasted carrots.  I made a few rolls as well as you can see in the photos. I think all in all, the bread turned out beautiful and it tasted great.  The roasted carrots add a bit of sweetness and extra color.  The whole wheat and rye part actually turned orange looking for some reason. Note: use 50% of the Levain for each dough. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Blue Water Directions Soak the pea flowers in boiling water for an hour or longer.  Strain flowers out before using. Main Dough Procedure Peel and cut the carrots into medium to small size pieces and toss in some olive oil.  Place on a sheet pan and roast at 425 F until soft and slightly charred.  Let cool until ready to use and cut them up into small pieces. Blue Dough Directions Mix the French Style flour or AP or Bread Flour with the Blue water and let rest for 30 minutes.  Next add the starter (see note above) and mix on low for 5 minutes.  Add the carrot pieces (50% of total amount listed) and mix for one more minute until incorporated.  Place in oiled bowl and cover.  Do some stretch and folds every 15-20 minutes 3 times.  After 90 minutes place in refrigerator overnight. Whole Wheat/Rye Dough Directions Mix the flours with regular water and let sit for 30 minutes to an hour.  Next add the starter and mix on low for 5 minutes.  Now add the other 50% of the carrots and and mix for about a minute until incorporated.  Per above, place in bowl, do S & F's and place in refrigerator when done. The next day, let the 2 bowls sit at room temperature for around 1.5 hours or if you have a proofer or it's hot in your house you can let it sit for an hour or less ( I set my proofer at 78 degrees).  Take both dough's out and form into a rough rectangle.  Place the blue dough on top of the brown dough and then shape into a ball and place into your basket to proof. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 535 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Below are some photos of the echinacea starting to bloom in the gardens.
Hi There, I am glad to share with you my latest baking experience. I have tried to revise a bread recipe from my own country, Sardinia. In particular the Ricotta Cheese Rolls. Spelt is not so popular in Sardinia but I fell in love with this flour hence could not resist to try to make my Spelt Ricotta Cheese Sourdough Rolls :) The Ricotta Rolls have a delicious ricotta flavor and have a very thin and crunchy crust. They are also very soft. Some people also add Saffron to the dough but I probably prefer to add it when I use normal wheat flour to give it more character and taste indeed. Here he final result :) Ingredients: 150gr Semolina flour 350gr White Spelt Flour 50gr Vital Gluten 500gr Ricotta Cheese (drain it before adding to the dough) 260gr Water + 40gr for the Salt 12gr Salt 200gr Spelt Starter (100% Hydration) Method: - Mix together the flour, the semolina and the VWG and 260gr of water and autolyse for 30 min/1hour - Add the 40gr water with 10gr salt and the starter and the ricotta cheese to the dough and knead for 10/20 min till all the ingredients are incorporated. The dough will be crazy sticky but no worries, keep kneading till the gluten structure builds up and it will be easier to manage ;) - Bulk Ferment for 2/3 hours depending on the room temperature etc (I BF for 2 hours @25 Celcius) - Divide your dough into 4 or 6 parts and shape it to form 4/6 nice rolls. Put them to proof on a baking try. You can either cover the try with some cling film or just put it to proof into the oven making sure it is switched off ;) - After 2/3 hours just before doubling in size or passing the poke test, remove them from the oven and preheat the oven @250 Celcius - Score the rolls, put a pot of boiling water in the bottom of your oven, bake the rolls for 30/35 minutes @ 220 Celcius till they sound hollow when  tapping at the bottom. - Let the rolls to cool down and enjoy your Ricotta Cheese Rolls ;) I hope you like this recipe and please let me know how you get on with it ;) Happy Baking Stefano
Hello friends!
To Mariana, my guiding angel Thank you for the enlightenment! I have successfully made Mr. Bigot's panettone using a simple method based on Mariana's advice.***  Mr. Bigot is a French master baker who apprenticed under Professor Calvel over half a century ago. He uses unique flour combination and procedures in his panettone formula. I am intrigued to find out how good this bread is. Mr. Bigot uses two Japanese flours, with protein contents of 10.7% and 11.5% respectively, in a 3:1 ratio to make his panettone.  He mixes the dough by hand and the final product looks like this: Spectacular, isn't it?! I followed Mr. Bigot's formula exactly but used my own procedures, which were created largely based on the information Mariana had shared. Let's start. Levain naturel I converted my existing starter to 50% hydration and built it with most of Mr. Bigot's levain procedures below: Day 1: 100g - (10.7% protein) flour; I used King Arthur all purpose flour (11.7% protein) 50g -yeast water malt syrup optional mix well DT 75.2F at  RT 75.2F x 6hrs shrink-wrapped, tied (which I didn't do), into fridge x 24hrs Day 2 100g - (10.7% protein) flour; again I used KA AP flour 50g - water 0.4g - malt syrup 50g - starter from previous day mix well DT 75.2F at RT 75.2F x 6hrs shrink-wrapped, tied (again, I didn't do it), into fridge x 12-24hrs repeat Day 2 procedures for 5 days to one week starter matures when it can triple within 5-6 hours My starter never tripled.  I decided it was active enough when it had doubled within 5-6 hours for two consecutive days. So I stopped building after the 4th day. My starter looked like this when it was ready. P.S. The starter was built using DBM's no-fuss method together with Mr. Bigot's procedures. There was no discard during the entire build. I did it that way for fun but it was quite a brain work-out to figure out the ratio and stuff. If you are interested to build your starter that way, please consult DBM as I may not be able to redo the math after six months. I'm sure he will figure it out for you. Right, Dab? Mr. Bigot's instructions to refresh (1kg of starter) Starter : AP : H2O = 1 : 2 : 1 0.8% malt syrup mix well DT 75.2F at RT 86F x 5-6 hours, should triple divide into 2kg each wrapped, tied loosely allowing 2-finger space ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- The following formula yields two 5.25" panettones, each weighs approximately 550-600g. Preferment all purpose flour 175g - 41.18% bread flour 75g - 17.65% levain 75g - 17.65% sugar 75g - 17.65% water 125g - 29.41% butter 75g - 17.65% It's impossible for me to mix by hand. So I used my Zojirushi bread machine to incorporate the ingredients.  I controlled the amount of ingredients being mixed so that a paste could be formed. I held on to the water and only added what's needed to form a paste.  Once a paste was formed, I incorporated the remaining water using the "double hydration" method. The dough was mixed until it had reached intermediate gluten development.*** I constantly checked the dough temperature to ensure it was below 75F .  If the dough needed more mixing but it was getting warm, I cooled it in the fridge then resumed mixing. I let the dough ferment at 81-84F for approximately12 hours. It doubled. I chilled the dough for about an hour before proceeding to the next stage of mixing. Main Dough A. all purpose flour 87g - 20.59% bread flour 37g - 8.82% egg yolk 187g - 44.12% butter 37g - 8.82% sugar 50g - 11.76% salt 2g - 0.59% Chilled the preferment first.  Used the same strategies when mixing: aim to form a paste, hold back liquid (yolk), maintain DT below 75F, chill if needed, then resume mixing, incorporate remaining yolk using double hydration method. Once the dough was close to be fully developed,*** mixed with ingredients in B. below. B. diced orange peels 25g - 5.88% diced lemon peels 25g - 5.88% raisin 75g - 17.65% rum-soaked mixed candied fruits 75g - 17.65% rum 5g to soak mixed candied fruits for a week (I only soaked them in the day before baking) Please be aware not to over use the rum.  I learned it the hard way in my first attempt when I did not read the instructions carefully.  I literally doused the candied fruits and raisins with rum.  They were completely SOAKED and every raisin was plumped. The alcohol killed the dough and there was no rise at all. Gluten fully developed. Usually I would stop messing with the dough but not this time... Bulk Fermentation Instead, I stretch-n-folded the dough every 30 minutes for about three hours when the dough was left to ferment at approximately 82-86F. When the folds could no longer hold together and slipped apart right after the S&F,  divide the dough in half. Stretch-n-folded each dough one more time. At this point the dough was strong and puffy and could be easily transferred to the molds. Bulk fermentation was complete. Final Proof At approximately 82-86F for about 6 hours. Preheat oven to 356F, then turned it off. Applied egg wash to dough.  Leave dough in oven for 5 minutes. Took dough out. Preheat oven to 320F. Cut the dough with scissors as shown. Peeled the 'crust'. Baked at 320F x 50 minutes. Used inner pots of rice and vacuum cookers to hang. Light as feather! even though much less butter (only 26%) is used than most panettone formulae.  The flour combination must have done the trick! Very little strong flour in the formula! ***In discussions with Mariana here. *In David Kelly's blog post here. The End ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Something special for my friends:
The incredibly hot and humid weather has not deterred me from a hot oven. And for some reason a stressful week becomes less stressful when I have bakes planned intermittently. I had my first go at a Pain Campagrain using bread flour, whole wheat flour, wheat bran, barley flour, flaxmeal, and sunflower seeds. I have not cut into it yet, but it turned out somewhat flat and dense. I baked at 400F for 20 minutes then 375F for an additional 30 minutes. I will probably up the temperature for the first part to get more spring. I am also hoping for some nice chew as I've been experimenting with steaming methods. I also baked a tray of Malva Pudding, a South African treat that is reminiscent of sticky toffee pudding but flavored with apricot jam. Happy baking! Michael Brock
I made a big batch (9) of the Scape & Asiago Levain today - a sourdough with roasted garlic scapes and Asiago cheese. My starter has been a little slow lately, and I also had to add two loaves worth of starter to the batch quite late (a late order), so some of the starter was not at all ripe (smelled like wet flour and had little gas). So when I made the dough last night I took a chance and let it ferment in the cool-ish basement overnight, rather than putting it in the fridge after a few hours at room temperature as I usually do. I was thinking of the recent discussions on various forums here about the importance of sufficient fermentation at the bulk stage, and how this contributes to airy crumb and appearance. It was with trepidation that I went downstairs this morning to look at the big bucket of dough, and found that it had at least doubled, had a nice matt skin on it and it jiggled like half-set jello when I lifted it. It deflated substantially when I eased it out onto the bench but maintained integrity. It was just on the edge of being sticky rather than tacky, but shaped beautifully into nice tight boules with strong skin. It felt so lively, unlike dough that has not fermented sufficiently. It proofed for an additional hour (about) and then went into cast iron pots to bake, seam side up for a natural burst. And the aroma ... oh, the aroma! I'm very happy with the way this turned out. Unfortunately, no crumb shot as they are all for customers, but the bread feels wonderful (you know how you can 'feel' the crumb without even slicing the loaf?) and the spring was great. I was so afraid it would be an over-fermented puddle, but that was not the case. Full fermentation really does make a difference!
Does anyone know of a brioche dough--middle class variety--made with a pate fermente? I'm sorry if this isn't the correct protocol. I imagine there is...it makes great sense. I just need specifics being a complete novice myself. Thanks in advance. Joshua Murphy
is and has a hard time finding 100% whole grain recipes.  SOI though we should post our favorites from TFL that we have made over the years right here for her.   Lucy thought we would start it off with a more difficult one but one that tastes fantastic. http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/41827/100-whole-spelt-sd-w-50-sprouted-flour-spelt-sprouts-baked-scald #2 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/43686/double-levain-100-whole-wheat-half-sprouted-100-hydration #3 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/45485/100-wg-rye-wheat-sprouted-ywsd-w-walnuts-prunes-cranberries-sunflower #4  this one is only 95% whole grain http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/35130/whole-multigrain-sd-bread-scald-seeds-and-more-aromatic-seeds #5 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/34520/9989-whole-grain-sesame-flax-seed-sourdough-whey #6 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/32497/100-whole-grain-rye-and-spelt-yw-sd-scald-and-seeds-altus-test #7 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/32921/100-percent-whole-multigrain-aroma-bread-2-soakers-11-seeds #8 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/34169/whole-multigrain-sourdough-loaf #9 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/32781/ww-sd-yw-multigrain-pumpernickel #10 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/51669/bran-levain-100-percent-sprouted-7-grain-sourdough #11 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/50402/100-whole-grain-bread-%E2%80%93-mostly-rye-some-sprouted-wheat #12 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/44668/100-rye-rye-berry-scald-walnuts-sunflower-pepitas-and-aromatic-seeds #13 is your lucky number http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/44263/latvian-sprouted-saldskaaba-maize-%E2%80%93-sprouted-sourdough-cider-rye #14 Couldn't leave you on 13 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/45211/another-westphalian-rye-100-whole-grain-half-sprouted-101-hydration Happy whole grain baking Fran
I wanted to put this  where I could lose it and possibly find it again using search for Glazing or Primer Here is the Rose Levy Beranbaum’s take on brushing on a crust Type of Glazes and ToppingsA crisp crust: Water (brushed or spritzed)A powdery, rustic chewy crust: Flour (dusted)A soft velvety crust: Melted butter, preferably clarified (1/2 tablespoon per average loaf)A crisp light brown crust: 1 egg white (2 tablespoons) and 1/2 teaspoon water, lightly beaten and strained (the ideal sticky glaze for attaching seeds)A medium shiny golden crust: 2 tablespoons egg (lightly beaten to measure) and 1 teaspoon water, lightly beatenA shiny deep golden brown crust: 1 egg yolk (1 tablespoon) and 1 teaspoon heavycream, lightly beatenA shiny medium golden brown crust: 1 egg yolk (1 tablespoon) and 1 teaspoon milk, lightly beatenA very shiny hard crust: 1 1/2 teaspoons cornstarch and 6 tablespoons water: whisk the cornstarch with 2 tablespoons of the water. Bring the remaining 1/4 cupwater to a boil and whisk the cornstarch mixture into it; simmer for about 30 seconds,or until thickened and translucent. Cool to room temperature, then brush on the breadbefore baking and again as soon as it comes out of the oven. Note: When using an egg glaze, it goes on most smoothly if strained. I like to add a pinch of salt to make it more liquid and easier to pass through the strainer.  An egg glaze will lose its shine if using steam during the baking process.  My preference is to use Safest Choice pasteurized eggs.
Another one of my not-so-successful bakes aesthetically but the flavor is so good.I was intrigued by uncle Dab's bran levain when I first read it a couple of years ago and I wanted to try it because he says it softens the bran and makes the bread more sour but I could not find whole grains in my area. Finally I found some whole wheat (It's been years since I have laid my hands on some WW and made a bread out of it) in my local baking supply store so I immediately tried it out. I made it two weeks ago but I did not have time to post it even though I have plans despite it not being 100% successful. More and more TFLers are trying it too with good results. Sesame and whole wheat are a pretty classic combination I decided to go with that and here is my interpretation of it.This was a 50/50 WW/BF blend so I gathered the required amount of WW and sifted the hard bits out. I got quite a huge amount that is almost enough for my 2 levain builds which surprised me.Here is the high extraction flour that I got (Am I using the right terms?). I autolysed it in the fridge until the next day for almost 24 hours to ensure that any hard bit that went through the sieve can soften adequately. I just added water until it formed a dough. I then took 1 tsp. out of my stock starter and fed it with the bran until I got a thick paste. I was not used to the coarser bran so I just made a paste because it did not incorporate as flour used to. I was wondering how will I monitor any activity with every piece of bran just sitting atop each other.Just after feeding for the 2nd build.The next day the levain rose a bit and was full of bubbles; its aroma has also changed, nutty and sour. For the second build the bran was not enough anymore so I added a bit of bread flour. It looked like nothing was happening but I was about to see the fastest activity of my starter that day. Just past 1 hour and it already doubled. I didn't really expect that it will be much more active with the bran perhaps because of added nutrients; normally it will take 2.5-3 hours for it to double. I refrigerated it for a bit because I need to go outside at that time.I mixed the autolyse, levain, bread flour, salt and just a little more water. These were mixed just until I got a soft dough. I gave the dough 3 sets of S&F's each one hour apart.I incorporated plenty of toasted sesame seeds after the first set of S&F. Bulk rise took a total of 4 hours.Here is where it got tangled. :) The dough was very active, doubling every S&F. I do not know why I let it hang out at room temperature at 34°C for 30 minutes. Sometimes, I put my shaped white doughs in the fridge immediately when I know its activity is super; this WW dough was more active! .It was already fully proofed by the time I put it in the fridge. The next morning, I knew immediately that it was overproofed because the volume was much much lower that when I put it in. Still had no idea why I forgot, I think it will still overproof even if I put it directly in the fridge after shaping. Perhaps, I should have put it the fridge after the last S&F so the core temperature will cool down and it won't overproof in the fridge. I think the best course for breads with whole grains or high activity is to just shape and proof the next day since the final proof is so quick! That's what I will do next time.Here is the pancake that I've got. I was a bit sad because the dough was already looking so good, I even managed to score it. I just baked it until golden on both sides and it looked very different from the dough.The dough was a little sticky with poor support on its structure so it was difficult to maneuver into the clay pot and it stuck to the pebbles which was difficult to pry hence it was ripped on one side.Crust was not as crispy and shiny as I would have liked. Volume was very poor and spreading was serious. Crumb was a little dense but still soft. BUT...The flavor! It was so good. Nice whole wheat flavor which goes great with the toasted sesame. The aroma was heavenly when it came out of the pot. No bitterness, a little sweet perhaps from the long autolyse. It was clearly very tangy because of the added whole grain, several notches tangier than normal, almost as tangy as my super sour white SD. No roughness! All of the bran was softened than when I just used WW directly as I did before. It just feels like eating a white bread with a bit more character. The rough bran is one of the reasons why I'm not a big fan of WW breads before. Bran levain works like magic!It looks like a slice of pie here. :)If you look at the slices, though not so desirable, they look perfect for bruschetta; albeit bigger more filling ones.I just discovered the magic of avocado in a savory application. Never knew it would be so good. It was one of the combinations that I was hesitant to try because we only have avocados in sweets. It was like pumpkin which is used for sweets in the west and only in savory here. Thankfully, I was courageous enough and knew what I was missing for years.It's avocado season here now so we have some good ones in the house. Of course, most went to our usual treat, chilled with condensed milk. For me, I took half an avocado, mashed it a bit and seasoned it with salt, pepper and calamansi which is a local lime. I spread it on a toasted slice and topped it with fresh tomatoes. I'm salivating again as I type this. So delicious!Avocado Toast as a part of my dinner.This side is burnt, let's view it from the good side.
I married into an immigrant family from the Czech Republic.  When they bought cumin seeds in Canada, they were horrified to find that they weren’t buying their beloved “Kmin”, caraway.  These look alike, and are closely related in the plant world, but are vastly different in taste. Toasting the seeds, then crushing was new to me, and great to learn.  I convinced our local library to purchase “The Rye Baker”. Check out this recipe on page 290.
Latest bake..used clay clouche.Really great oven spring and ears
Bereit sind, arbeiten Sie hart und Opfern Sie viel Auswuchs Sauerteigbrot
Hello all, I am hoping someone on this forum can lead me in the right direction.  I know that there are differences in milling between French and American flours.  I have my own home mill (a Nutrimill classic) and I would like to create French type flours at home.  I understand there are differences in humidity, ash content, malt and types of wheat but can't seem to find much guidance for the home mill.  Any suggestions? Thank you!
I am still trying to get my retarding times sorted in the new wine cooler. So yesterday evening I did a not very scientific experiment and put it in the wine cooler at 6C for 5 hours....I have found that the dough takes quite a while to 'cool' down and when I took dough temp after 5 hours it was 9C before baking... Took the loaf to a barbecue today and thankfully people know me when they saw my reaction once someone cut the loaf!  It must have been the Disco light that did it in the wine cooler! 75% hydration Champlain, 1 hour AL, Rubaud combined with slap & fold, 3 X 30 min tucking in dough each side (coiling) and then left dough alone until end of bulk, bulked 50%, bench rest 15 min and cinching for final shaping.
This is a 50% whole-grain spelt bread, the rest of flour is T500 (strong white flour). The dough was hand mixed with 4 hour long autolyse, then starter was mixed in and the gluten was developed with scoop & stretch method. Salt added after about 30 minutes and a bit of additional  scoop & stretch for about two minutes and then stretch & folds every 45 minutes for first 3 hours of BF. About 73% overall hydration,  30 hour long cold retardation at about 10 degrees Celsius, then direct bake in iron-cast skillet starting at 240 dC for 10 minutes, 220 dC for 20 minutes and continuing uncovered for 10 minutes at 220 dC. Happy baking, Joze
This is a pretty simple bread made with 55% fresh milled and sifted Durum flour along with a little fresh milled whole wheat and KAF French style flour.  The Instant Pot yogurt was added to soften the crumb and roasted sweet potatoes add some extra tenderness and flavor. This was a very tasty bread, perfect grilled with some melted cheese brushed with a good olive oil. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, yogurt, sweet potatoes and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 525 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
In last months I was experimenting quite a lot with fermentation process. This bread is the result of latest experiment where I am testing the procedure how to get really well open crumb. Basically this is the amended Tartine country loaf recipe which starts with the true autolyse (just flour+water) for several hours, continues with adding starter, one hour resting period, adding salt plus additional water (double hydration), followed by at least 6-8 stretch & folds at about 30 minutes intervals during the bulk fermentation. At the end of bulk fermentation the dough is chilled in the fridge for 6-8 hours, then shaped cold and final proof is done on the bench. The starting baking temperature is about 260-270 going down to normal temperatures after first 8-10 minutes. The overall hydration in this particular case was about 85% and the white flour protein content was above 13%. The dough was hand mixed. I had similar results with flours with substantially lower protein content - only 9.3%. The outlook of this bread is similar to famous "crystal bread" although this bread is not made according to that recipe and the hydration is much lower. Happy baking! Joze
Just purchased 25# Durum Wheat berries from Farm Flavors Hole Grains in Chilton, WI.  Dave Meuer and his wife run a farmhand have Einkorn (avl. 8/18), Durum Wheat, Emmer, Oat, Rye and Spelt in berries and flours they mill on the farm.  Number is 920-418-2676.  Website is www.meuerfarm.com.  He makes the rounds of Central Wisconsin and delivered right to my door.  I purchased the durum berries for $22.50 which is a great price considering they are organic and delivery was free.  Just wanted to pass this along to you TFLer's here in Wisconsin who mill their own flour. Regards, Big Crusty
Rainy days have long come over but the luscious, sweet and juicy mangoes that I have frozen remind me of summer. Hot and humid sunny days where you spend your time outdoors playing, kite-flying, swimming only to go home at dusk smelly and dirty. Ah! The good old days! It's the time almost every kid is looking forward to...... the rain just can't stop me in bringing summer into our home. Summer's Last Hurrah! I made this fabulous mango tart.This was inspired by a dessert that Nancy Silverton made with Julia Child. It was the first time that I saw a yeasted bread dough as a base for a tart. It was far more complex than this one; in addition to the creme fraiche custard brioche tart, it was served with wine-poached fruits and a rich sabayon. What moved me as I watched it was when Julia cried as she tasted it declaring it as the best dessert she ever had.Here is my take on a similar dessert with my own spin to it using mangoes (which is my favorite fruit) harvested from our own yard, sourdough and a special custard..I made the dough using the leftover bran levain that's why it has bit of texture and character. I usually keep a bit of the past levain then make a levain out of it for the next bake then I keep a bit again until the the next bake; the cycle continues on and on. When I find out that the leftover levain is hard or has changed color, that's the only time that I get some from my stock starter to make a levain. The dough was made with a bit of sugar, salt, 2 bantam eggs, enough milk to make a very soft dough, levain, bread flour and butter. I added more butter than I'm used to for my enriched breads which makes this definitely a brioche. The liquid content was also high for lightness so the dough was very sticky but after kneading which took 30 minutes, it was very strong and not sticky at all. Bulk fermentation at room temperature took 4 hours, sugar was not very high so it doubled easily. I then refrigerated it overnight.I divided the dough into 2 and made a single big tart and miniature ones.For the miniature ones, I divided the dough into 6 and shaped each into batards. I let them rise in my mini llaneras until almost doubled. I then made a depression in the center to deposit the custard and mangoes. The custard was a deconstructed pastry cream. I thickened some milk flavored with vanilla with some starch then added the eggs to be baked later which means it was a baked custard as opposed to a stirred one like pastry cream.The lava custard was mainly inspired by a Japanese cheesecake shop along with some other desserts like liu sha bao and lava cake. For both the big and mini tarts, they were bake at a high temperature with live fire to cook and brown the brioche base quickly and to cook the custard at a safe temperature while still maintaining it's runny consistency before it has the chance to set completely.Up close...You can see that the mango transformed and became firmer in the clay pot.It's baking time was quicker so it did not brown or the custard will set. Despite all of that, the lava effect was to a greater effect in the large tart.----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------It's monsoon season now; in fact we experienced heavy rains today from a typhoon-augmented southwest monsoon but looking at the pictures of this tart still makes me think of summer. Flood in the yard is about knee-deep but thigh-deep in the area near the river. Here are some photos from different parts of the yard.----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------For the single large tart, I rolled it into a circle 2 inches larger than my tin. I then employed Silverton's technique of folding the edges into the center for a raised decorative edge. I let it rise until doubled then deposited a large amount of custard and sliced mangoes.I baked it for 30 minutes over a roaring fire for brown crispy base and runny lava filling. For both versions, I let them cool to room temp then chilled them for a couple of hours until completely cold. This tart was huge, almost 3 inches tall. The filling was very jiggly and the tart looks a bit delicate that I still don't know how I managed to get it out flawlessly from a tin without a removable bottom. Its look is inspiring me to try a deep dish pizza next time.I have something to attend to the next day so I cut it despite the absence of natural light because I want to taste it at it's best. If you look at the side and edges from different angles they look very different. They look like rugged mountains.Here is the lava, you can see it flowing and gushing out from the cut tart.Under natural light. I don't want to miss the details that only natural light seems to provide to photos. You can see how light the crumb is. It grew more than 4 times its original volume, hence the lightness from the well developed dough.The bit of bran in the levain made for a nice bite in the finished tarts. Both were light but the large tart was definitely lighter, almost feathery but still did not fall under the heavy filling and fruit. The mini ones were soft all over but the large one has a nice crispness that provides a nice contrast with the soft and fluffy crumb.This one was exceptionally tangy, even tangier than my WW loaf. I know, bran contributes to the tang but it was very low this time. Perhaps the milk and egg or other enrichments were responsible for this. My parents who do not like very sour bread loved it because it adds to the overall experience. Its tang goes exceptionally well and balances the sweet rich custard and the sweet mangoes (mangoes here when ripe are super sweet with no tang at all) and makes you feel like eating a creme fraiche custard or a very light cheesecake. Very very delicious! Now, I just have to find a way to fit in more mangoes in this tart.To cap off this wonderful tart experience, I want to share with you a video about teachers. (NOTE: The video was set in 1996 which I think is a time where corporal punishment is still the norm for instilling discipline to students. It might also be accepted in some cultures but not in other cultures. Please take note of that. :) Also, the ritual of paying respects to teachers seen in the video is unique to just a few countries and must not be seen as teachers putting themselves as supreme authority; in fact we do not have it in our country but we respect teachers and show our gratitude in a different way.)It is in Thai but it has English subtitles. When I watched this, I wish I knew Thai to fully appreciate its meaning because there is always something lost in translation but I realized now that you do not need language to understand its message. It was shown to us during my review as a motivational video. I am a type of person that is not easily brought to tears even by very dramatic scenes from movies or series but this immediately gave me a weird feeling and as the video ended I can already feel a tear forming in the corner of my right eye.I watched this again right after I knew that I pass the licensure exam and just 12 seconds into the video, I started to cry with tears running through my cheeks from both eyes. I knew that moment that this is going to be my life God willing and I know how difficult it is but at the same time how rewarding and fulfilling it is to be a teacher. Our oath taking ceremony is this Sunday. I hope you enjoy! Thank you very much!
It's been a while since I have blogged here, but I have been baking. In the past couple weeks, I have actually baked some new stuff that I think is worth sharing. First, I am still stuck on Ken Forkish's "Field Blend #2." This is a mixed grain sourdough with about 40% whole grains. I have been home-milling the whole grains since I got my MockMill and appreciating the results. Forkish's formula calls for some whole wheat and more whole rye. I love this particular mix, but I have substituted Kamut for some or all of the rye at times. All the breads have been good. So far, I like the original blend best. Here is one of the most recent bakes: ------------------------------ At the end of last month, I had made a 90% rye bread. I had rye sour left over, and I hadn't made Jewish Sour Rye for a while, so I did. I think they came out well. ------------------------------- I have been sharing some loaves with neighbors and with a committee I am on that meets weekly. The loaves I keep for my wife and myself may not get completely consumed before they get a bit dry. We have a number of favorite uses for dry bread. One of them is Salmon Cakes that my wife makes. They are super-delish, both hot out of the pan and cold out of the fridge the next day. ------------------------- I have been wanting to make pizza for weeks, but it just wasn't happening. One morning, I decided I had to "just do it." I had been making sourdough pizza crust with varying results for the past few years. This time, I decided to go in somewhat the opposite direction. I made the dough using Ken Forkish's "Same Day" pizza dough from FWSY. I used 25% Caputo 00 and 75% "Bread flour." Okay ... I am passionate about sourdough baking, but, I must say, this made one of the best pizzas I've had not made in a wood-fired oven. The toppings were our current favorite combination: Tomato sauce with garlic and oregano, mozzarella, caramelized red onions finished with balsamic vinegar, Italian sausage and mushrooms. Parmesan, fresh basil leaves, pepper flakes and EVOO after baking. I made enough dough for 4 pizzas. My wife and I ate one. Another was frozen for future lunches. The other two dough balls sat in the fridge for a couple day, just growing and growing. So, I made a focaccia with fresh rosemary and garlic and coarse sea salt. It was awfully good for white bread and made a nice sandwich with Adell's smoked chicken/apple sausage. Although I have been home milling at least some of the flour in almost all of my baking for the past few months, I had yet to make a bread with the majority of the flour fresh-milled until today. Today's baked was, again, from FWSY - a 75% whole wheat levain. Now, many of the FWSY breads I like call for spiking with instant yeast. I typically leave it out. For this bake, the formula called for just a tiny bit of instant yeast, and I thought "why not?" Well, even with no proofing except at 40ºF in the fridge, the loaves over-proofed. So oven spring and bloom were modest. The crumb structure remained good, and the flavor is lovely. I'll be making this bread again, but leave out the IY next time for sure! ---------------------- That's what I've been baking for the past few days. We're planning to spend most of the rest of July - the hottest month of the year where we live - in cooler climes. (Bach Festival in Carmel and Giant's games in San Francisco.) Hope you all are coping well with the weather where you live! Happy baking! David
I decided to repeat my last weekend yeast water/sourdough levain bake.  I had run out of the flour I prefer to used my second choice.  The dough was really wet, although the gluten development was good, it was a really soft dough and I was happy how it baked up. This weekend I decided to use 50% of that same flour and 50% of my normal flour.  I checked the formula and now see that yes it is a really wet dough!!  50% water (Bakers percent) and 30% yeast water!!! Friday night late I made the levain: 9g starter + 42 g flour + 42 g water and left it overnight. Also mixed up a yeast water poolish: 60 g flour + 60 g active yeast water.  Left this on bench overnight as well. Saturday: As I was keeping the microwave at 80 deg F for Maurizio's 50:50 ww bake, I put both levain and poolish in there for a while as both were a bit sluggish. 13:15 autolyse 196g flour mix + 107 g water and 30 g yeast water. 13:40 Add levain and yeast water poolish and mix.  200 slap and folds.  dough has come together beautifully! even though it was wet (but not as wet as last weekend's dough).  Oh darn I have forgotten the salt!  Added salt and did another 30 slap and folds. This was followed by 4 sets of 5 coil folds every 30 minutes then left to BF. 17:00 I suddenly realised it had increased  about 80% so preshaped, rested 20 minutes then shaped and retarded overnight. Baked this morning in DO preheated to 250 deg C - 15 minutes lid on (dropped temperature to 230 deg C convection)  then 15 minutes lid off. Blown away by the bloom and oven spring in this 550 g loaf!! Crumb shot later, but so excited that I got such a good bake with a high hydration dough!  the loaf is super light too so I can hardly wait to see the crumb. I have to rethink soooo much! Leslie
I have been away from bread making for a month due to other obligations and this was the recipe that called out to my baker’s soul. 🙄 The last time I did this recipe, I used cracked rye and oat groats so I changed it to bulgur and old fashioned oats. I also changed the Wholewheat flour from Red Fife to Selkirk wheat. The bran was sifted out and used in feeding my starter to get it up to speed before making the final levain. The procedure was also changed a bit as my curiosity was piqued when reading about putting the dough in the fridge at the end of the bulk fermentation. A few of you seem to be getting some amazing results. I do remember getting some really open crumbs when I have occasionally retarded the bulk in the middle of things due to an interruption of some sort, but I have never done this intentionally. And never for several hours! Makes 3 loaves Liquid Levain build 272 g Bread flour 343 g Water 55 g Starter (bran was used to refresh it at a 100 % hydration) Soaker 100 g bulgur 100 g Flaxseeds 85 g Sunflower seeds 85 g old fashioned oats (large flake) 484 g Water, boiling 6 g Salt Dough 533 g Unbleached flour 15 g Vital Wheat Gluten 274 g Sifted freshly milled Selkirk wheat flour 303 g Water 30 g yogurt (Greek because that is what I had on hand) 21 g Pink Himalayan Salt All of the Soaker 650 g Levain A couple of days or the morning before The night before making the dough Final mix and bake The loaves had pretty good but not fantastic oven spring. That being said, I got great ears even though I didn’t score the dough.  Crumb shots to come later when they cool. That’s the first batch to come out of the oven. I have a second batch of six and a batard to go in as soon as the oven is back up to temp.
gogli70 and all the great breads he posted.  he worked at bakery and baked for the Farmer's Market too.  His blog is worth reading in my book. Here is just one of his great breads 93% whole grain ciabatta at 89% hydration. From 2013 http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/34926/93-wholegrain-ciabatta-w-white-wheat-and-spelt This was Josh's first attempt at David Snyder's SFSD http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/36356/sjsd-my-first-attempt
I finally got around to baking this bread; had it bookmarked for ages! As it is blueberry season here, and I happened to have some cream cheese handy, I thought of it and went ahead and baked it. So good! Here's the original post (in case you don't have it bookmarked). :) My crumb isn't as open and light as Floyd's was, but then, I probably didn't wait long enough to cut it, it smelled so good. We ate one and I froze the second for a family dinner coming up.
I made a large, dense pagnotta foggiana over the weekend and the entire process went really well. Whole wheat flour for the biga with cornmeal mixed into the bread flour for the dough. Coarse, chewy, and crusty. Typical of Italian bread in general, maybe closely resembling a nice Pugliese loaf. Because I worked all weekend I had to do all proving in the refrigerator and I was pleasantly surprised with the results. My scoring improved and my experiments with baking at higher temperatures have paid off. I do have a general question though.  We are experiencing unusually hot and humid weather currently in Michigan and I decided to gradually add bread flour during the mix until the dough was perfect, knowing that the absorption would be effected by the weather and following my usual ratios might not have worked. So, no matter what method of bread making you use, is there a certain step in the process that you give leeway for due to environmental factors? Grazie! Michael Brock
This is my version of Dan Lepard's walnut bread.  Instead of walnuts, I substituted cashews as the main ingredient. I would like to increase the recipe's hydration next time as Lepard's hydration is quite stiff (see attached photo).  The final crust is crispy and the bread's interior is softer due to the mix of AP flour and bread flour in contrast to the original recipe of just bread flour. My revised recipe is as follows: (makes 2 loaves) For cashew paste: 50g cashews 30g water 20g melted butter 2T white sugar Pinch kosher salt MIx above ingredient in blender to create paste. For dough: 200g AP flour 150g bread flour 100g Dark rye flour 50g Whole wheat flour 100g leaven 100% hydration .8g instant yeast 100g cashew paste 100g cashews 240g water 10g kosher salt MIx all wet ingredients including instant yeast, add to dry ingredients. Knead every 10min x3. Fold dough 1hr x1. 2.5 hours bulk fermentation Divide dough into 2 and shape into ball. Rest 30m and shape and cover to container.  Proof for 2 hours. Transfer into dutch oven with cover and bake into 220C oven 25min, remove cover and continue baking for 20min more.
Yesterday was our Oath-Taking ceremony. It was full of pride and joy. Why wouldn't we be proud and happy when I found out that I was 17th all over the country. I only prayed to pass and out 76,673 who took the licensure exam, only 22,936 passed and out of those 22,936, I am the 17th! To celebrate the occasion, I made this special bread.It is a panettone-like bread in terms of flavor but I added just a tablespoon of butter. Why? Because I have other plans for this bread. The dough was made with bread flour, all-purpose flour (because I ran out bread flour), eggs, sugar, salt and butter. Kneading was only 20 minutes and it made a strong windowpane perhaps because of the all-purpose flour with less gluten. The dough was rich even with just a bit of butter because aside from the water in the levain, all the liquid came from the eggs. My starter was slow in raising this dough so I left it overnight at room temperature for bulk fermentation. Great decision. After 12 hours it was doubled, nicely risen and fermented.I don't have candied peel so I added only raisins in the dough but because I want to pack as much raisins as possible; I stretched it into a thin and long rectangle then scattered raisins rolled it from the long end and coiled into a snail to shape it before proofing it in the tin. I did not soak the raisins because I don't want extra moisture and I want the raisins to even dry the dough. Proofing took 4 hours and it is as high as the tin before baking.Hence, it made a nice dome after baking. The sides were a lovely golden brown with blisters the there was even a little browning on top. I can't believe that I made this lovely bread. It has an air of an "Alfonso Pepe" Panettone.Look at those blisters.My plan for this bread is to turn it into a special bread pudding for a special occasion. A more elegant one because it involved the whole bread being turned into a pudding unlike other puddings which use cut-up bread. To make this pudding I let this delicious bread dry (I originally intend to use the word "stale" but decided against it because it was just dried with no stale flavor) in the fridge for 2 days then bathed in a rich custard flavored with orange and vanilla to make a similar flavor profile to my panettone french toast dream that didn't materialize last time. I think this bread and bread pudding is special because you make a bread with the pudding in mind, you make a special bread with a purpose rather than finding a way to save a bread that you unintentionally let stale. I added very little butter because I want the crumb to be sturdier because it will be soaked in custard so it will still have integrity when it is already a pudding. I cut the dome off the bread last friday for a neat finish and to facilitate the soaking of the bread; it was a substantial snack on Friday afternoon. Here is the inside of the freshly baked bread. It was not feathery but still light, soft and fluffy. No tang at all with the right sweetness and so aromatic. It was a very good raisin bread.The dome.This is the portion that was turned into a pudding.The fridge did a very good job in drying this bread so it absorbed the custard well. I bake the bread last Friday and the custard on Saturday night because I know we will be euphoric from the Oath-Taking ceremony and might not have the energy to do thing so I prepared things in advance so I can just bake this pudding straight away to celebrate. When we got home yesterday, everything was prepared so I just soaked the bread with the custard. Perfect time-saver because we were already tired from the long travel and we were trying to catch a replay of the Pacquiao-Matthysse fight. :) I'm happy for our senator's win but I'm happier for my parents yesterday.Here is the bread getting bathed in custard.After an overnight custard soak.I baked the bread pudding for 20 minutes over live fire and 20 minutes over ember just to dry the center. I knew it was done because I can smell it from upstairs, so aromatic! I was greeted by this beauty when I opened the clay pot. It looks very silky! I can imagine a crunchy caramel top would so well with it.It looks like a perfect candidate to be "bruleed". If I had a torch, I would brulee it! The bread definitely became plumper and heavier and the lines became harder and straighter. I love how it looks!I love how the sides are crispy and the inside is so silky and custardy! Perfect contrast! And the crumb maintained its structure that I have an idea how the fresh bread looked from the inside. My orange-vanilla custard trick worked too, it feels like I am eating a panettone bread pudding with plump and juicy raisins. It's like turning a whole panettone into French toast. The pudding was already very rich so it needs no additional custard or whipped cream or syrups; it perfect as it is. The texture was different from a normal bread pudding. It feels like eating a very moist and silky slice of bread. It's hard to explain. It's just so good, perfect for the occasion!My dad was so excited to taste it so he cut it immediately into perfectly neat slices.A truly memorable treat for a memorable occasion! ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Some pictures from the Oath-Taking Ceremony.I wore a traditional formal wear reserved for the most formal of occasions.Any formal wear would do but I decided to wear my best Barong Tagalog because our Code of Ethics states that each teacher is a trustee of the cultural and educational heritage of the nation and is under obligation to transmit such heritage as well as to elevate national morality, promote national pride, cultivate love of country, instill allegiance to the constitution and all duly constituted authorities, and promote obedience to the laws of the state. WIth my very proud, happy and thankful parents. With the pin signifying that I am already a fully-fledged Licensed Professional Teacher. It was a once in a lifetime experience. I felt goosebumps especially when we spoke our oath and I almost stuttered with some of the words. All of the sleepless nights, time, money, effort of mine and my parents did not go to waste. I managed to hold back my tears especially during the singing of the Hymn of Professionals with lyrics like this. Propesyonalismo at integridadProfessionalism and integrityResponsibilidad sa bayang nililiyag(Our) Resposibility to (our) beloved nationKahusaya't kaalamanExcellence and KnowledgeTaglay naming mga propesyonalUs professionals have I think I almost cried because I felt each word, the gravity of the duties that are now on our shoulders and the challenges that await us and that even in my lowly condition in life, I am now considered a professional. With all the pride and joy comes this tremendous duty and responsibility. This is not the end, this is just the beginning of real life journey and I can't wait to practice it to touch and mold young lives. The achievements of mine are now finished, it is about my students now. It is now a lifelong goal to be the best teacher that I can be for my students. Thank God for everything! Thank you for taking the time to read this and thank you for letting me into your life!
Starter Preparation Starter dough which was conserved in water for 16 hours at a regulated 20 degrees C was removed from storage and cleaned to obtain the "heart". This involved the removal of a dry crust formed on top and a wet under-layer which were then discarded. The remaining dough was pressed gently before being sliced into strips which were then allowed to soak in a bath made from sweetened water (2g sugar per litre of water). After 20 minutes the dough pieces were removed from the bath and squeezed to remove excess water before being scaled to the required weight. An equal quantity of flour, 1 part starter to 1 part flour (1:1) and 35% water were added to form a dough. This was then left to rise for 2 hours at 28-30 degrees C. Autolyse An autolyse process was prepared at 50% hydration using Leckford Estate bread flour (100%) and 1 percent diastatic barley malt flour. The flours were initially mixed with only part of the water to first form a breadcrumb-like texture. The remaining water was then added to allow for the formation of a dough which was allowed to rest covered with cloth until the starter was ready. Main Dough The remaining ingredients; salt and water were scaled and mixed. The starter dough and autolyse dough were divided into 8 roughly equal pieces and mixed together individually by hand kneading before being combined into one dough. This was again re-cut into numerous pieces which were added one by one to the prepared salt water solution with the mixer operating at speed 1. A paddle attachment was used to mix the ingredients until a dough formed that cleaned the bowl. This took approximately 5 minutes. The attachment was then changed to a dough hook before being mixed at speed 2 for a further 5 minutes. Fermentation The completed dough was allowed to ferment for 90 minutes at 28-30 degrees Celsius before being shaped and allowed to proof for further 5 hours at room temperature (approximately 25C). Baking After the proof period the dough was scored three times and transferred to a pre-heated cast iron stone before being placed into an oven at 230C. Steam was used during the first ten minutes. Comments "The finished loaf rose well although it is a little wide for its height. This can be contributed to a number of factors. The original formulation is designed to produce baguettes which require little strength. The flour although marketed as bread flour isn't particularly strong. The method could have been adjusted to allow for a longer bulk fermentation which would have developed more strength before being shaped." Visual assessment and organoleptic characteristics Golden hue and many blisters cover the crust. Creamy-white crumb. Wheaty aroma. Slight sweetness on the palate. Soft and light textured with a very subtle hint of mild acetic acidity that finishes through the nose. Stats. 14% pre-fermented flour. 68% hydration. 2% salt
Every now and then I go to Peter Reinhart's "Bread Revolution" for something different. I've been meaning to try sprouted pulp bread for some time, and the time was right. I have a sack of Kamut (Khorasan wheat) that I don't use much because it's just too hard and difficult to mill by hand. Like milling gravel into sand - the resulting flour is very coarse and sandy. I sprouted some a while back, dried it and milled it into flour, which was easier than the unsprouted grain but still time consuming to dry it properly. This time I sprouted a big jar of it, then whizzed it wet into pulp in the food processor. Reinhart had a perfect recipe to try it out. He used Emmer pulp in his version but one of the options was Kamut instead. Other ingredients are soaked raisins and chopped nuts (I used walnuts and hazelnuts instead of walnuts and almonds as in the original recipe. I try not to support the water-intensive almond industry more than I have to). There is a bit of dry yeast in with the levain, and also a bit of vital wheat gluten in the mix. Mixing went well in the Ankarsrum. The dough was nice and stretchy, though a bit sticky. Bulk was only 1.5 hours, and the dough rose nicely. The bit of flour on the top is so I could poke the dough. :) Pre-shaping and shaping went fairly well though the dough was quite sticky (partly because of the fat, wet raisins!). Reinhart bakes it at 460F, with steam. I followed these instructions but in hindsight should have turned the oven down a bit for at least the last half of the bake. It's a very bold bake - on the verge of burned! The crumb is very nice and moist. Reinhart suggested that the pulped raisins would dissolve into the dough, but that wasn't the case with the dough roller on the Ank. Lovely flavour and texture; I will make this again (now that I have a big bowl of sprouted Kamut pulp!).
You know how bread (or specifically, naan) is perfect for soaking up every last drip of curry? And how addictive paneer curry dishes are? Palak paneer, methi malai paneer, paneer butter masala and achari paneer, to name but a few. Curry bread is definitely not a new idea. See the popular Japanese fried curry bread (Kare-Pan) for evidence. Here, I combined Indian curry spices, Thai strong-flavoured condiments and Western cheese in this bread, a surefire way to wake one’s dimmed summer appetite.
Hello friends!! A couple of weeks ago, Abe posted a mid week bake. I've never done a mid week bake. I just couldn't figure out how to fit it into my work schedule (08:00 - 17:00). So Abe's post really inspired me to try it, and it worked!! I didn't miss a beat with my regular routine. Here's how it went: Monday: 1. Levain build, just before work. I used my cold starter straight from the fridge (20g NMNF rye starter, 40g whole wheat flour, 32g water). 2. 17:00ish get home and autolyse flour and water for an hour. 18:00 Mix levain, dough and salt for a couple of minutes, rest for 10ish mins and repeat. 18:45 Lamination (basically stretch the dough out on the counter as far as it will go, and then fold it up). I was trying to build strength quickly because I didn't want to be up until all hours of the night folding dough! (It was dark so the pictures aren't great). Stretch and fold x 3 at 19:15, 20:00 and 21:00. Bulk ferment at room temp overnight. The temperature was about 2 Celcius over night so, it was pretty much the equivalent of refrigerating it. I did keep the dough warm during the stretch and fold period though (in the oven). 3. First thing in the morning, preshape and rest for 30mins. Shape and proof for 1 hour at room temp (while doing all my morning things before work). leave dough in the fridge for the day. 4. 17:00 on Tuesday preheat oven, bake at 18:00, loaf done by 18:50! I could have sliced last night, but I left it till today. Here is the formula, its another mostly white SD. Thanks for the inspiration Abe, in my mind working a full day meant I could only be a weekend baker, apparently not :) Happy baking everyone Ru
During the Champlain community bake I abandoned Trevor's premix method as it degraded my UK flours too much and I ended with soup... Thinking a bit more about temperatures I thought what would happen if I were to do the 'premix' method but keep the dough 'cooler' rather than into fridge and then get to room temp. I used the 304g amount of water for 70% hydration as in his formula. After mix I put dough at  8PM in my wine cooler at 10C overnight and mixed at 7AM with leaven from the night before. Dough was really soft but much more the consistency as seen in his video but a bit softer. I then did 2 X 30 min interval coil folds and then basically left the dough in the proofer at 80F....till 3.5 hours later. Pre-shape, 20 min bench rest and then at 10C in the wine cooler....for 2 hours... I really tried not to look at the clock but to get a feel for what the dough looks and feels like when it should be ready...then I ran out of time and had to bake as I had to go out for the rest of the afternoon...and dough looked kind of ready... So...here are the photos...I think it would have been a better crumb, if I would have had time to let it go for a bit longer...and needed a bit more time! The pre-mix is something that I will try again now...it really makes the dough softer and opens up that crumb!!!!! "We know that already!!!!!" you may tell me off.... but I never could get it working  in my kitchen with my flours and this is really exciting. I just need to keep the pre-mix a tad colder in the wine cooler and it seems to work. Just need to get that 2nd proof right...That really is my kryptonite!!!!   Kat
It's been abnormally hot in Deepest Lancashire (as with most of the UK) these past couple of months. So much so that my normal 900g batardes are going stale before we finish them. The obvious solution was to make something a bit smaller, so I split my usual dough quantity, based on 1kg flour, into three loaves, each around 670g unbaked weight. I'm also currently exploring retarded bulk fermentation, so I incorporated that into this bake. Flour mix Levain Other Process Thoughts A nice fresh levain: The loaves: And the crumb shots: Lance
This one is a keeper.  The depth of flavor added by the Guinness,coupled with the grilled onions and freshly ground rye is amazing.  The added freshly made yogurt provided a nice soft crumb as well.  All in all, this one is worth trying.  It's the perfect grilled bread as well as sandwich bread. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. [caption id="attachment_4862" align="alignnone" width="490"] New Hydrangea we found last week....one of our new favorites![/caption] Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, yogurt, honey and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  During the last minute add the onions to incorporate.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 535 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I joined The Fresh Loaf a week or two ago when I realized I was going to need help to achieve more open crumb. What a wealth of knowledge on this site! Current Goals I realize my dough handling skills and my experience working with wet doughs is lacking. So, I am trying to become comfortable with wet dough, otherwise, I find myself avoiding certain recipes out of fear of having too much trouble. Over the past few days I tried (with little success) to bake high hydration 100% whole wheat bread. 8 flying saucers later and I learned a lot, but, struggled to get the proofing and shaping right. Things got better each loaf, but, I have a lot more learning to do. I am not focusing on flavor yet. Thus, I am using commercial yeast for now. I am going to switch to leaven soon though. Yesterday's Bake I wanted to make things easier on myself and also check to see if some of my intuition about how dough 'works' was correct. So, I decided to make a 100% bread flour recipe. I decided to make 2 batches of 2 loaves each, which worked out great, because each loaf was an opportunity to observe how small changes in the baking process impacted the loaf. For example, the 2nd batch bulk proofed much more than the 1st batch, so much so that I worried i over did it. Well... the 2nd batch came out better than the 1st. Recipe (Made 2 batches, split each batch into 2 loaves) Total:Bread Flour 580 g (100%)Water 406 g (70%)Instant yeast 3 g (0.5%)Salt 12 g (2%) Poolish:Bread Flour 193 gWater 193 gInstant Yeast (a pinch) Dough:Bread Flour 387 gPoolish 386 gWater 213 gInstant Yeast 3 gSalt 12 g I mixed the poolish and left on countertop (house is air conditioned to 78 degrees). Loosely combined the additional flour (387g) and water (213g) for autolyse and left on counter for 30 minutes, then put it into the fridge until the poolish doubled. The autolyse didn't have enough water and it the gluten developed into a very very very elastic stress ball. I had to work real hard (fingers and arms hurt) to combine the poolish and the autolyse. Then added instant yeast, followed by salt. After 8 loaves of high hydration dough, I realized today's dough was going to be a different beast... it seemed like it was too elastic. To develop gluten, I kneaded it in the bowl, stretch fold, stretch fold, stretch fold for about 10 minutes, then I took a 10 minute break and did it again. I did this until most of the dough's stickiness was gone. Then I transferred the dough to a clean bowl. And did a stretch and fold until the dough ball got taught to the point of almost tearing every 30 minutes until I was ready to shape the dough. I think I did 4 stretch and folds with the first batch and about 7 with the second batch (the second batch went in the oven a lot later). Baked in a dutch oven for 20 minutes covered and 10 minutes uncovered at 500 dF for first 10 minutes and 460 dF for last 20 minutes. Photos Post Bake Thoughts
Stole a recipe out of "The Laurel's Kitchen Bread Book". Fresh Milk Bread. Milk, Butter, Water, Yeast, 100% whole wheat. The bread turned out beautifully and sliced easily. I was much more confident today deciding when the dough was fully proofed and everything worked out quite well. On the first loaf, my scoring was too hesitant, on the second loaf I just went for it and got a clean score right off the bat, even though the score should have been a bit deeper. I feel like I am getting better every loaf! The wife said the bread tasted a bit like burned milk. I didn't taste any off flavors, but, I know she doesn't like milky breads. A couple of years ago we made a few loaves of JAPANESE TANGZHONG MILK BREAD because we heard it had a longer shelf life. This bread tasted similar. This recipe is a little dry, but not as dry as Tangzhong Milk Bread.
On a recent trip to the US, I discovered Trader Joe’s. Wow! Lots of cool new things to check out. One of them was unsulfured dried apple rings. Of course , I had to grab a couple of packages. And looking around for ideas, I found a recipe using dried apples, cranberries and hard cider (http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/17974/51410-cranberry-apple-cider-bread-walnuts). I took my last European Peasant Bread recipe adaptation and added/subbed the above ingredients to it. So here goes: Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Ingredients: 150 g spelt berries 150 g rye berries 150 g Kamut berries 820 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax 350 g filtered water 500 g hard cider 23 g Himalayan pink salt 30 g local yogurt 100 g cranberries 75 g dried apples rings 280 g 100% hydration levain (procedure indicated below) Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Dough procedure: As to the overall slowness of the dough, the day wasn’t particularly warm outside (68F) and it was quite overcast with the occasional rain showers. Someone mentioned that they noticed atmospheric pressure affected the fermentation of their bread and I wonder if this was at play in this case. Last week the dough moved along quite briskly. Mind you it was a completely different recipe but still...
320g     106.7%       Total hydration (including tang zhong)
This s take off from out our normal Banana bread cupcakes that we like because they are iced with sprinkles bt Lucy was not having the least bit of interest tn more work on a busy Saturday and said in the pan it goes. It turned out delicious anyway.
Hello friends - This weekend, I revisited my seeded SD. The recipe is very similar to the last version except: Formula: The method I used is a bit different. I've been playing around with different ways to develop strength in the dough. I'm loving the lamination technique. I think I just like stretching my dough out across the counter. Is it weird that I find doing this fun and actually quite therapeutic? Method: 1. Night before mixing: Levain build (20g NmnF rye starter, 12g rye flour, 38g w/wheat flour, 40g water). Leave over night. Toast seeds and soak in 50g boiling water. 2. Next morning: 2.5 hour autolyse before adding levain and salt. Mix for about 30 mins. [I mix for about 2 - 3 mins, rest for 5 - 6 mins and repeat x 3]. Rest for an hour. 3. Lamination: Gently, stretch dough over counter. [I did get two little holes, but that's fine]. Sprinkle over seeds and fold the dough over into a little parcel. Rest for an hour. I really enjoyed adding the seeds with the dough stretched out, I was so much easier (and less messy) than how I usually do it (at the initial mixing stage). 4. Stretch and folds. I did one every hour for the next 3 hours. In hindsight, I should have skipped the first one. The dough still felt a bit tight. 5. Bulk ferment for however, long the dough needs until it nice a proofy and jiggles when you shake the container. My dough took anther 4 hours. I really had to convince myself to leave it alone for as long as it needed. I was making a white loaf at the same time and that dough was ready after 2.5 hours. The dough for the white loaf was exactly the same as the seeded loaf, just without the seeds. 6. Scoop the dough out of the container and leave to rest for 30mins. I skipped the preshape, I didn't think the dough needed it. 7. Shape and proof for 1 hour at room temp, retard for 14 hours before baking. Here it is: I'm very happy with how this turned out. The crumb is not as open as the previous version. Might be because of the higher seed and whole grain content, but I'm not complaining. I prefer this version of the loaf to the last one. The crumb is super soft and fluffy and it tastes really nice, the pumpkin seeds are a nice addition. Here's the (mostly) white loaf I made at the same time. The formula and method is exactly the same as the seeded loaf, just no seed and this one had a shorter bulk. Okay, that's all from me. have a great week everyone, happy baking :) Ru
I set myself the target whether I can produce a really good example of a 'Fool's crumb' with all the features that Trevor describes in his book. Not really - I tried an experiment with Champlains to use extended cold bulk fermentation in my wine cooler overnight, shape in the morning and totally misjudged the 2nd proof! But, rather than only share the good, here you also get the 'ugly' and this might be useful for someone learning. Certainly when I started off, I did not know what underproofed loaves looked in comparism to overproofed etc. So here we go the 'Fool's Crumb' tutorial: Sloped sides of the loaf seem to be a symptom and you can get an 'ear'...... Inside the typical big holes with dense area around it... If only I would have waited longer.......my resolution is now to to finish reading 'The Bread Baker's Apprentice' during the holidays in Cornwall and then try more the cold bulk fermentation as per Peter Reinhart with the iced water and ambient proofing...     Kat
My poor little oven is dying a slow death. It no longer gets above 500f - this bake took 25 minutes - a good bake for long baguettes should be 20 max preferably 18. Result, disappointing pop, but fortunately decent structure on the inside. Dark on the bottom and thicker tougher crust. This mix was rather low and slow on yeast getting about 1.5 volume overnight on cold retard had these puppies been given a bit more kick i am sure they'd be fantastic ... Quelle dommage !
I have setup a granite slab to bake some baggies up to 12" long. Following Alfonso's setup, this one seems to work quite well. My oven has no bottom heating element, so I have to flip the baggies to color their bottoms. No big deal, and some initial poolish baggies yield seen below. Yep, they look more like batards, but tasted great.
I take photos with my phone. The Fresh Loaf upload procedure is too slow for me. I want to test out posting an image hosted from a different website.If this works properly, you should see some pizzas we baked tonight.
A few weeks ago, someone posted about a rye bread, and David Snyder referenced a recipe for Hansjoakim's 70% Sourdough Rye.  Having dabbled a bit with whole rye flour (as in Field Blend #2 from FWSY), but never having plunged deeply into that area, I decided to give it a go. Especially because the recipe sounded relatively simple and straightforward. If you are looking for a bread with a nice rye flavor and texture, try this one.  Thanks, David! First I needed to create a rye starter, but that was easy.  As David indicated in the other thread, one feed of rye to my regular starter (typically fed with a 50/50 mix of AP and whole wheat) was enough.  At 7:55, am I mixed 15 g of my regular starter with 50 g of whole rye and 50 g of water.  Opting to bake two loaves, I created one rye sour final build at 5:30 pm and the other at 6:20 pm so as to stagger the bakes the following day. If you think that you need a lot of starter, consider these photos.  A piddly 11 g of starter combined with 218 g of whole rye and 218 g of water.  The middle picture is right after mixing the build, and the picture on the right is from the next morning.  Sure surprised me. I chose to use my KitchenAid mixer.  Everything goes in at once for three minutes with the paddle and then three minutes with the dough hook.  The mixture tended to cling to the paddle, but not so much to the dough hook.  (Forget about those admonitions with wheat flours to mix until the dough leaves the sides of the bowl.  This rye dough ain't leaving nothing.)  As David mentioned, the mix "at this point is a thick paste with little strength."  Certainly unlike any dough I had worked with before. Did I hear anyone asking for a quick bake?  There are no stretch-and-fold sessions.  Simply transfer the dough to an oiled bowl and cover it for an hour.  That's the entire bulk fermentation.  Pre-shape (to the extent possible -- this stuff feels more like a pile of mashed potatoes), bench rest for a whole five minutes, and then final shape (again not so easy, but I did manage a sort of Tartine-type package) and into a banneton. The recipe calls for a two hour final proofing, but this stuff rises swiftly (even Field Blend #2 with its commercial yeast supplementing the sourdough starter is nowhere near as fast to rise).  My kitchen was about 80F, and taking David's advice to heart (his kitchen was a similar temperature according to his write-up), I shortened the period to about an hour-and-forty-five minutes.  In retrospect (note to self for the next bake), with a kitchen that warm, I would consider an even shorter final proofing.  Here are the before and after (just into the banneton and just before coming out). The bake went as David described, with an initial temperature of 480 being dropped to 440 and then 420 and then 400.  I too did not get much oven spring, and I attribute that to leaving the dough too long in the banneton.  (The loaf with the slightly greater oven spring is a gift for someone else, and that loaf proofed a shade less time.  Maybe I will see the crumb.)  The bread has a great rye flavor, however, with a nice chewy crust and a crumb that is both soft and dense. Starting at 8:00 am, I had the first loaf out of the oven a pinch after noon.  Although the recipe cites medium rye, I used whole rye to capture as much rye flavor as possible.  This is definitely a bake that I will do again.
Isn't it funny how goals change depending on where you are on your journey? Firstly, Open crumb as a keen and quite naive beginner in October was top of the list...quickly followed by 'scoring'...oh those elusive ears in my overproofed loaves in the warm fridge phase... Then, a new oven and a new wine cooler...everything changes again!!!!! So, now with things being a bit 'settled' I aim to have a number of formulas that I know so well that I can 'read the dough' and get a  sort of reliable 'good' result... I seem to be getting there with the Champlain.... Oh you baked it often enough I hear groans across TFL!!!!!! Keeping a close eye on what the dough is supposed to look like coming out of the wine cooler. I set it to 4C for 10 hours and the loaves temp was 7.5C in the morning...happy with the result... Also, interesting what shape of banneton produce what shape of loaf or open crumbness...another thing to think about.... Crumb of 'chubby' one in smaller but deeper cane banetton... Batard crumb in longer oval brotform... Scoring....before going into oven..sorry blurred as hands were still shaking!!! If the right spot for retarding is hit the loaf seems to come off the banneton but still have tenseness...The way the score opens also gives an indication of 'readiness', I think...not much opening...sign of being a bit under or much under....too wide opening too quick...tendency direction overprooved.... I really would like to hear what you all  think about the 'feel' of your retarded loaves to judge the spot?
My first "bagel-crust" squares were a hit; a tad softer and fluffier but with all the loved characteristics of a bagel. We loved them so much that I decided to make them again with a different variation. Ian (isand66) always reminds me of the seeds and other bagel toppings in my past bagel bakes so I made this one with his suggestions in my mind.I found some dried onions the other day in the supermarket. Norm's onion rolls immediately popped into my mind. Is this the dried onions that are used in them? I really want to know the flavor of dried onions for a long time so I grabbed it immediately and I was able to make a "formula" quickly.What else goes better with onion other than potato? They're best friends! I bought 250 g of potato (raw weight), scrubbed the skins clean, cut them so they were roughly the same size and cooked them until soft on top of our steaming rice for fuel efficiency. I think it's common for most Asian families take advantage of the steam from cooking rice from a free facial to cooking and reheating food.I let them cool before I mashed them. They were not as soft as boiled ones so I was not able to mash them as finely with my hands which I kinda like; there were still bits of potato in the finished bread. I soaked the dried onions in hot water for 30 minutes and I saved the soaking water for the dough. They were then seasoned with a bit of salt, sugar, oil and freshly ground black pepper. The dough has bread flour, onion soaking water, salt, sugar, levain, potatoes and 1 tbsp of butter. With the huge amount of potato (almost equal to the flour), I find that it doesn't need fat to be soft, the butter was more for flavor like in mashed potatoes.I kneaded until gluten was sufficiently developed then I added the onions which added a considerable amount of liquid. I kneaded the dough a bit more just until the extra moisture was absorbed.Bulk ferment was fast, just over 3 hours. I think potato is also one of the things that my starter loves.I shaped it into a neat square then to the fridge immediately. I found out next morning that it was way overproofed (my dough was really fast with high activity) so I reshaped it into a square and put it back in the fridge to bake it in the afternoon. Still, it proofed just right despite the short time in the cold; it will be overproofed again if I didn't check it earlier.I cut it into 4 squares; I did not trim the edges anymore because this is a huge batch of dough so scraps can take precious clay pot space which I did not want.I boiled them straight from the fridge 1 minute on each side before baking it in the clay pot.I drained them on a towel and when the surface was just sticky to the touch I rolled one in sesame seeds just to test if they will burn badly in the pot or not. Ian, here are the seeds you've been looking for!I baked them until golden brown on both sides with live fire all the time. Here they are baking.Here are the results:As control, I baked one without boiling just to see if it makes it a difference. Clearly it does as you can see. You already miss the shiny crust that boiling provides. Here are side by side comparisons.The cut "sides" also did not bake the same. I think that the cuts baked like how "scores" in other breads bake. Although I call them rolls, they are quite hefty. Each is as big as my palm.The crust of the non-boiled one was thicker, crunchy in a sense that it was drier and was also messier to cut. The crust of the boiled ones were thinner, crisper but more elastic and stretchier and more delicate; the best thing that we love about a bagel (apparently only me loves their chew that's why I came up with a recipe to emulate their signature crust but has a softer fluffier crumb). No wonder that we prefer the boiled ones. The crumb is hands down my best to date. It was the same for both versions; somewhat open, very very moist and soft with the barest hint of chew. A huge amount of potatoes really creates a special texture. My family says this is my best bread and we will earn some money if I will sell them. The black bits in the crumb are bits of black pepper.The flavor was bomb! The potatoes, onion, pepper and sourdough worked together to create a taste so sublime. Perfect sweetness and tang. It felt like eating a slice of a good pizza even though there's no trace of tomatoes, cheese or meat in here! The sesame version was even more aromatic. It was my favorite in terms of looks and taste. I will make them all with sesame next time for the added flavor and crunch. If there is one thing that I wish I could have done, it is to increase the pepper; a more peppery bite will surely send this over the edge. It is my family's favorite in terms of texture and flavor. Definitely a keeper!Crumb from different parts and angles of the rolls.I was surprised by the open crumb / large bubbles in this one. Finally, some random photos. :)"Bagel-crust squares" is a pretty long name so I am thinking of a new name for them. I am planning to call them "Kulo Rolls" from "kulo" which means "boil" in Filipino but I don't think it will sound very nice to the ears of a Spanish speaker. :) Anyhow, I might stick with that name next time. Thanks!
I haven't baked a white loaf since my disastrous encounter with Leckford Estate bread flour, so I thought it was time to excise some demons and have another try - with a different flour! Having had success with a bulk retard in my last bake A Trio of High Extraction Loaves I decided to use the same technique again. The only thing I wasn't totally happy with last time was the scoring and ears on the loaves baked uncovered, so I thought I might as well give the "double retard" a try on one of the loaves; I've always had good loaf appearance after a retarded final proof. Flour mix Levain Other Process Thoughts After the mix: Start of Bulk Proof: Out of the fridge: Nice & bubbly!: Onto the bench: Preshaped: Ready for FP: Baked boules: And the batarde: Nice blisters!: Lance
The Ultimate Fast Sourdough by Jim Lahey My notes:100% of the credit for this recipe goes to Jim Lahey. I used a three quart cast iron dutch oven which fit this loaf perfectly.After the first initial 30 minute rest period, which I used a tea towel to cover the dough with, once I started doing the gentle stretch and folds inside the bowl, I covered the bowl with plastic wrap to prevent the dough from drying out too much. When it came time for the parchment paper, using scissors, I cut a circle of parchment to the approximate size of my three quart dutch oven to get the dough into it easier. I also preheated my gas oven to 475 degrees (splitting the difference between 450-500 degrees he recommends depending on your oven) and kept it at 475 degrees the entire time baking.Jim recommends to "slice the dough to help it rise." I didn't do that just because I forgot but it didn't seem to me to be absolutely necessary.For this recipe I used King Arthur all purpose organic flour and King Arthur organic wheat flour. My sourdough starter which is normally fed at a 1:1:1 ratio (that is 1 part sourdough starter to 1 part flour to 1 part water by WEIGHT) this time I fed it at a 1:4:4 ratio which was 20 grams of sourdough starter to 80 grams of flour and 80 grams of water. I feel that this gives the starter more vigor in my experience. When the sourdough starter was at its peak of activity about eleven hours later I started the recipe.The bread has a delicious light "nutty" flavor that my wife says is her new favorite. The crust and crumb on this easy to make bread is out of this world. Once toasted I really have to pace myself and not eat too much of it :-)Yield: One 9-inch round loaf.Equipment: A 4½- to 5½-quart heavy pot with lid; a large piece of parchment paper.100 grams prepared starter200 grams (about 1 1/4 cups, plus 2 tablespoons) unbleached all-purpose flour100 grams (about 2/3 cup) whole wheat flour6 grams (about 1 teaspoon) fine sea salt230 grams (about 1 cup, plus 1 tablespoon) 65F-70F waterWheat bran, for dusting1. In a large bowl, combine the white flour, wheat flour, and salt and whisk to combine. In a small bowl, whisk the starter and water until the starter is fully dissolved. Pour the starter mixture into the flour, and use a flexible spatula to quickly mix. Cover the bowl loosely with a clean kitchen towel, and let the dough sit at room temperature for 30 minutes.  2. Turn the dough, pulling it off the sides of the bowl and folding into the center as you turn; work it as little as possible. Cover loosely and let rest for 30 minutes before turning the dough again. After approximately 5 turns, or 2 ½ to 3 hours, the dough should be ready. (Don’t expect to see a big increase in size in this dough—by turning the dough every half-hour, you are doing what I call the lazy man’s version of kneading the dough—improving the texture without much effort.) Note: How do you tell when it’s ready? You want it to get to the point where it is capable of holding a shape, and not ooze into a pancake when you shape it into a ball.  It should be so interested in sticking to itself that it easily peels off the bowl when ready to shape.   3. Place a large piece of parchment paper on a sheet pan and cover with wheat bran, so that you can no longer see the paper. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured surface and form it loosely into a ball: hold it with both hands and gently tug the sides down and under, into the middle of the dough, to make a taut ball; don’t let the dough tear. Set the dough seam side down on the bran-coated paper. Dust the top of the dough lightly with more bran. Cover loosely with the towel and let it sit at room temperature until doubled in size, about 2 hours.Slice the dough to help it rise.4. Preheat the oven to 500F (450F if your oven runs hot). Preheat a cast-iron ovenproof pot with tight-fitting lid, such as Le Creuset, in the oven. Carefully remove the lid and transfer the dough on the parchment into the pot. Use a serrated knife to score the loaf with a long slash, to allow the dough to expand. Cover the pot immediately and place the pot in the oven.5. Bake the bread for 35 to 40 minutes with the lid on.  Carefully remove the lid and tear off any excess parchment. Bake for another 10 to 15 minutes with the lid off, until the crust is a very, very dark brown.  (I urge you to let the bread cook, uncovered, until the top of the bread nearly blackens and the sides reach a very, very, very dark brown.) Remove the loaf from the pot. Cool the loaf on a wire rack. The loaf will continue to cook as it cools, so try to wait an hour or so before cutting into it.
Hi bakers, I've not posted here in a while because I got graduated and I was very busy, but I didn't stop baking bread and I'm happy to repost here with a new experiment: baguette! I wanted to challenge myself with a new shape and new shaping techniques and I have to admit that all the process was challenging but far from impossible! I used Trevor's recipe, I found it on youtube (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MLXeV_R8Y3s&t=4s) and it is an easy take on the process of making baguette but, as he said, the results are pretty decent and very close to a more difficult one! I shaped them after I watched some videos on youtube and after staring at Tartine bread book for hours and hours to get the movements right and to develop a tight dough with a regular shape! As you see from the pre-bake and pre-resting photo, the size is good and I managed, in some way, to shape it quite right...but my tray isn't big enough to contain a baguette this long (so maybe next time I'll divide the initial dough in three parts in order to have three little breads instead of two longer ones). The final result (the photo on the cover of this post) is surprising to me because I wasn't expecting bread like that: with crunch but at the same time tender and with the right ratio between the external crust and the crumb inside. I'm really happy and I can not wait until the next bake because I'm in love with the idea that every time I learn something new and that I can feed me and my family and friends with bread but also with love and passion! I would really appreciate your advices to improve my techniques and your thoughts on my first ever baguettes! Hope all of you are doing well, keep baking! Beatrice, X
I have not made a porridge bread in a while and I have not used eggs in any bakes either for quite some time.  I like the extra flavor and moisture eggs add so why not use them in a porridge bread as well? Whole eggs are around 76% water so in this bake 150 grams of eggs equals 114 grams of water which is why the total liquid amount is not higher. The bread turned out very tasty and makes great grilled bread or just toasted with some cheese or butter.  All the goodies packed into this one along with the fresh milled whole wheat and rye  made this extremely flavorful.  The small amount of maple syrup added just enough sweetness to round out the flavor profile. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, eggs, maple syrup and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 550 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I was tempted for a long time to make a bred with dark red wine which we produce in Slovenia. This bread is my second attempt to make this kind of bread. Here are the instructions for those who would like to make bread with red wine: 1.) Take a recipe for the bread you think you would like to "convert" to wine bread. No changes in the procedure. 2.) Instead of adding water add wine reduction - simmer the wine for few minutes that you get rid of alcohol. This will likely change the color of the wine. Then cool the wine and use it instead of water. If you want you can replace just a part of water with wine but this will definitely result in less intensive color of the crumb.. 3.) Be careful with hydration as the wine will have influence on the gluten development so I recommend that you start initially with lower hydration (65-68%). The rest of the procedure is the same. This bread was leavened with yest water made from tomato and basil which is really very strong. My starter (mixture of 50g of yeast water and 50g of white flour) doubled in two hours. Happy baking and enjoy experimenting. Joze
These actually turned out ok ! Dealing with a 80 degree kitchen does not help in the least - I usually do these when it's closer to 68-70F which affords a lot more time to work the dough and butter. Strategy today was to employ some freezer time and just hustle. By the time shaping came around dough is pretty soft and very hard to manage. Shaved off a few grams of yeast and final proof for only one hour as opposed to 1.5-2 - it is possible !
I loved all the posts on the community bake and decided to join in on the fun with a few adaptations of course! 😉Here is my version: Diastatic Malt 4 Days before: Recipe: Makes 3 boules Starter: 60 g starter 30 g unbleached all purpose flour 70 g soaked bran (explanation in directions) 30 g water at 90F Main dough: 559 g high extraction Selkirk wheat flour (explanation below) 292 g Rogers Bread Flour 266 g Rogers Unbleached No Additives All Purpose flour 50 g freshly ground flax 12 g Diastatic malt 936 g water at ~90F divided (explanation below) 25 g Himalayan pink salt 30 g full fat local yogurt 158 g levain (explanation below) 2 Days before: 1 Day before: Dough Day: The scores really didn’t open up much but the boules are nicely full and round. They feel nice and light so I am hopeful for a decent crumb. Right now the first two batches are cooling and the last two batches are about to go in.
But National Sushi Day is November 1st! Here is Dabrownman's Swordfish Nigiri - Nigiri is traditionally served 2 identical at a time. And here is Dabrownman breaking the rule and serving 6 - 3 of each at a time with some Salmon Nigiri but there were 3 of us so we got 2 each if that counts.  I have never seen bread of any kind served with sushi of any kind Most Sushi Masters around here are Mexican's dressed up to look like Japanese ones so I like to put Poblano , Serrano and Yellow Cubana peppers on our nigiri. in their honor.  Here is one for Mike that shows a swordfish one all dressed up with spicy mayo, made with real Japanese Sansho peppers and eel sauce that is not made with real eels like it is in Japan :-)  Lucy subbed thick, dark, mushroom flavored soy for eels instead.  It has every condiment on top of the rice - the peppers, carrot, cukes, cream cheese, green and red onion, celery, avocado..... Get that Sushi Grade fish ready for November 1st!  Maybe we should invent some kind io bread for it?
Many people wanted to get details how to make the bread with translucent alveoli walls which I have published in the community bake 50% wholewheat thread. So I promised to make notes about the process. However, this bread was not made with sourdough starter but rather with tomato and basil yeast water. For those who don't like to read too much here are the major differences to what most of people usually do: 1.) Longer autolyse (this time 4 hours) at room temperature 2.) Extended bulk fermentation in the fridge for 18 hours 3.) Bread was shaped as ciabatta. 4.) There was almost no final proofing - just time needed to warm up the oven 5.) Staring baking temperature was 500 dF (260 dC). This are by my opinion the differences which are not common in most recipes or traditional procedures. The reason for 4 hour long autolyse is giving more extensibility to the dough caused by enzymatic activity of protease. Second reason is to hydrate well the bran particles so they will have less sharp edges and will not cut the gluten network so much. I made this bread only from 300g of flour mixture with 50% of whole-grain wheat flour and 50% of type 500 white bread flour with unknown protein content but estimated to be between 11 and 12%. Definitely with significantly smaller protein content than American or Canadian flours.   The plan was to shape it as ciabatta. The process is as follows: 1.) Two stage levain build: first stage with 50g of white flour T500 and 50g of yeast water. When doubled add 50g of whole-grain wheat flour and 50g of water (better if you use here yeast water again). The levain build will take about 5-8 hours. 2.) Mix whole-grain wheat flour and white wheat flour type 500 with 70% of water (70% of weight of flour for the main dough) and let it rest for 4 hours at room temperature. 3.) Mix levain and alutolysed flour with hand and develop gluten by using scoop & stretch method (rhubaud method of mixing). This usually takes about 2-4 minutes and as result you get a cohesive dough. Let the dough rest for about 20-30 minutes. 4.) Add 2% of salt and additional 5% of water (if necessary) in my case this was 15g. Incorporate the salt and water into the dough and repeat gluten development with scoop & stretch method. 5.) During the bulk fermentation make 6 stretch & folds at 30 minutes interval. 6.) When the signs of the dough are clearly visible: dough is well aerated, billowy, has risen for about 40-50%, the traces of previous folding are clearly visible at next folding then transfer the dough into rectangular container which is well oiled with olive oil and put it in the fridge for at least 12 to 24 hours. See the attached video. 7.) When the dough has risen nicely and one can see a lot of alveoli - after at least 12 hours, tip the dough out of the container and shape it as ciabattas. See the attached video. 8.) As this dough contains 50% of whole-grain flour it does not need a lot of final proofing. I just preheated the oven to 500 dF (260 dC) and baked the ciabatta in iron-cast skillet. No scoring needed! The temperature should be reduced to 430 dF (220 dC) after 8 minutes, uncover after 15 minutes of baking (from the start)  and continue baking at  410 dF (210 dC) for 10 minutes more. Overall baking time for ciabatta is about 25-30 minutes. In the picture above one can easily spot the bran particles in the translucent alveoli walls. I hope that the instructions are clear enough that you will be able to make such bread. Happy baking! Joze
franbaker and I are going to be baking the same recipes and comparing the results. My bake yesterday is the first of our cooperative bakes. We both attempted PiPs' "Home with Bread/Fighting Gravity" recipe. I am looking forward to see Fran's post about her bake day results. franbaker's post about her bake: Recipe (thank you PiPs!): Cool things about this bake: For convenience reasons, my plan was to make the following tweaks to the recipe: What actually happened The Bake: Hard Red Wheat Starter (4 hours): I started the sourdough 24 hours prior to usage, with a seed of 25g 100% hydration hard red wheat. I added 25g hard read wheat and 25g water. 8 hours later, added 50g hard red wheat and 50g water. Then, stole 46 g of that starter as a new seed for my final starter build. 46 g seed, 93 g hard white wheat, 60 g water. Waited 4 hours until usage. 46 g seed 100% hydration hard red wheat93 g hard white wheat freshly milled60 g water Autolyse (1 hour): 950 g hard white wheat freshly milled800 g water Mix 1: 1750 g Autolyse (84% hydration)199 g Starter  (71% hydration) 4 Stretch and Folds, then, wait 10 minutes... Mix 2: 1949 g Mix 1 (81% hydration)55 g Water44 g Salt Final Hydration: 88% Bulk Ferment/Shaping/Final Proof: Bake: Final Comments Above: Dutch Oven Crust Above: Dutch Oven Crumb. Above: Romertopf Crust Above: Romertopf Crumb Above: Up close romertopf crumb
From Peter Reinhart’s Artisan Breads Every Day
https://stanton-finley.com/weblog/sourdough-starter.html
https://goodcookingfortheheartandsoul.blogspot.com/2018/08/brooklyn-ny-style-pizza.html
https://stanton-finley.com/weblog/sourdough-recipe-calculator.html
This particular loaf is inspired from Maurizio at The Perfect Loaf. I was looking for a different flavour combination and this intrigued me. I am not particularly fond of fennel but the rave reviews convinced me. The first hiccup was to find some diastatic malt because Maurizio uses malted flour but no such animal is available in Canada. I thought I had made diastatic malt last weekend but since I let the shoots get green, I was informed by “the powers that be” that my diastatic malt was no such thing. Well that explains why I didn’t notice a darker crust or crumb. So I was on the hunt to find some locally. Long story short, I found some CMC Canadian 2-row malt berries in a small brew shop. Yes! And “the powers that be” on TFL tell me that this will work! Double yes! The second hiccup was milling my whole grains. Maurizio used whole wheat flour but I wanted to change things up so I subbed out some Kamut and Spelt just because. 😁Well, I didn’t quite mill enough to provide enough bran for the levain so I ended up using some bran left over from last week’s bake. I was short 2 g of Kamut so I simply added 2 grams of red fife. I adjusted the quantities below so that it should be okay. If there isn’t enough bran for the levain, just make up the difference with unbleached flour. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Ingredients Levain: 25 g starter 50 g bran/flour mixture left over from milling and sifting 50 g unbleached flour 90 g water at 85F (divided into 50 and 40 g portions) Main dough: 125 g high extraction Red Fife flour (mill and sift 140 g of whole berries) 50 g high extraction Kamut flour (mill and sift 65 g of whole berries) 50 g high extraction Spelt flour (mill and sift 65 g of whole berries) 800 g unbleached all purpose flour 11 g diastatic malt powder (mill finely 11 g of CMC Canadian 2-Row Malt barley berries) 50 g freshly ground flax 12 g vital wheat gluten 800 g of water at 86F 20 g pink himalayan salt 30 g yogurt 150 g levain 200 g golden raisins (soaked in hot water for 30 minutes and drained) 7 g freshly ground fennel seed 2 days before: 1 day before: Dough making day: Baking Day Looks like I got fantastic bloom on these loaves. They really burst open! I hope the crumb is as nice as the outside! Oh and they smell wonderful!
mantra and calling card.  My wife is from St Louis and I grew up in Kansas City.  I ran across this youtube video about artisan bread in St Louis and Kansas City with a treat at the end that reminds me of where we live now and what we think about when it comes to cuisine and what we like to eat and drink.  I would suggest to smoke the Italian sausage though. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tD7E5nD7900 Happy viewing.
We are back from the holidays and needed bread... So back to baking some Champlains and was a bit nervous as my last bake before the holidays did not go very well..... I like the 'square scoring' that the Italian baker Matteo Festo sometime uses and his stuff on IG is amazing! He says it helps with oven spring and I gave it a go..... https://www.instagram.com/p/Bdm9H_YAP5F/?taken-by=ca_mia_breadlab I love the way it just opens up like a flap! could not resist and just cut the loaf...quite happy with the crumb....considering it is the lower hydration Champlain... and the other loaf... .....my friend Anna gave me the basket to distribute my bread! Ha, Ha I feel like Little Red Riding Hood!
Another fine artisan baker with a French Flair https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KMTwNU-8glE
My starter has been living in the fridge since its creation, but last week it decided to die for some reason. Fortunately, I had some dry starter chips in the fridge, which I could revive and after two feeds the "new" starter was good to go, very active. I hydrated the dry chips for 4 hours, and then fed it twice over the next 20 hours. Notice that I used tap water directly and things worked out fine. I believe the tap water here does not have a lot of chlorine. Baked a loaf made of 67% white + 33% mixed whole wheat and rye flour at 68% overall hydration and 9% fermented flour. I also added some 10% mixed seeds for texture (flax, quinoa, chia), which were soaked in cold water for about ten hours. Very pleased with the crumb and crust. The loaf had an explosive oven spring, tearing apart the scoring slit from side to side as never seen before in my loaves.
I have a nostalgic childhood memory of a black or near black bread that used to appear on the table at family get togethers in the East End of London just before and after the war. Once in a while that memory returns strongly enough to encourage me to start yet another futile unsuccessful search to discover what this exotic bread was…….. futile that is until last month when I came across  This video on YouTube under the name rus brot. It is in Russian with English subtitles and it was the opening shot of the finished loaf which stirred those old memories. However I was surprised to see that the bread was actually Borodinsky bread created using a 1940 recipe, a bread I am familiar with from other recipes and from Stanley Ginsberg’s “The Rye Baker”, but always shown as a tinned loaf and a rather lighter colour. None of those had previously given me that Eureka moment that said “this is it”. So of course I had to bake one for myself. It is quite a complex recipe requiring a two stage levain build, a scald which has to be kept at 63-65°C for five hours, a pre dough and a final dough mix but my first problem was getting hold of the 50g of red rye malt flour called for in the recipe, which as others have found is rarer than hens’ teeth. But I happen to have some rye grain and my new toy, a Mockmill 100, so how difficult could it be to malt it myself?  A quick search on this site resulted in an entry from dabrownman dated March 2012 which gives the method complete with ample photographs, so thank you for that Dab. After that I just followed the recipe using my own milled rye flour and Marriages Strong white instead of the 150g of first clear wheat flour called for which is unobtainable in the UK (unless someone tells me otherwise) and here is the result. It is quite delicious although not quite as open crumbed as I would like even for a wholegrain rye loaf. So having had my “Eureka” moment the doubts are starting to set in. I have now seen other loaves on the rus brot channel which might also have qualified as my childhood black bread and my own attempt turned out to be more mahogany than black so if anyone out there can suggest or guess at what bread might have been baked and sold to the largely Jewish immigrant families of London’s East end before, during and after the second world war I would be more than pleased to hear. As a post script, for anyone interested, rus brot has a collection of 15 videos of Russian and German bread recipes including the Borodinsky which are in Russian with English subtitles.   They can be found Here
Yesterday i gave good old Black and Gold flour a run. The sour dough culture was revived from its slumber (2 months away) and was good to go. i decided it was time to try Chad Robertson's Tartine Country loaf. The formula differs from my normal 3:2:1 which has the levan @33% CR uses 20%.I didn't have any wholemeal flour on hand so substituted that for Kakulas Sisters Multigrain flour i also added some wheatgerm too but other than that it pretty much followed the formula in his book. i also used less water too.The method was to combine the levan and the water first then to add the flours and bring together into a cohesive mass leaving the salt aside for the Autolyse (rest) period, Mine lasted an hour, you then sprinkle over the salt and work it into the dough with a squeezing action until it dissipates the dough is then set aside in a good sized container and allowed to rest covered for an hour, the dough is then given a series of stretch and folds each hour and set to rest again each time i did S & F's over 4 hours, on the 5th hour the dough was turned out onto the bench and divided into 1 piece @750g for my regular Banneton and the other @ over 1100g for my longer larger Banneton. The dough pieces were pre shaped and allowed further bench rest of around half an hour, they were then shaped and inverterd in the bannetons (seam side up) they were placed in the much maligned single use plastic shopping bag (no longer single use) to protect from droughts and skinning, it also catches transpiration gases and moisture and maintains a moist environment for the dough piece to expand. The kitchen was quite cool @19 deg C so i used the Subaru wagon sitting outside in the sun with a very pleasant 31 degrees C Just about perfect. After just over 2 hours the proof was now ready the oven was pre heated to the max the tray with boiling water and a terry towel hand towel was doing its thing in the bottom of the oven the first loaf was tipped out onto a hot baking sheet and scored and into the oven the temperature was set at 210 C. The idea of cranking up to max is that a lot of the hot air is lost when the door is opened for loading plus the steam generation is also lowering the temp as steam is formed at 100.the steam tray is pulled from the oven after 10 to 15 minutes once the crust is set and there is no more oven spring taking place. the bake takes 30 to 35 minutes to complete.On this occasion the second loaf followed the first, i had placed this in the fridge whilst the first loaf baked just to slow its development. Over all very happy with the result and will be trying this one again quite soon, It will be a good swap for some caper bush cuttings and possibly some caper seeds too from Fiona i have attached a chart showing the differences from the Chad Robertson formula and mine
It was  a Great day to have the oven on last week with a cold blustery day outside,  decided on a fruit loaf as the grand daughter was having a sleepover that night. i had a new bread tin that has a sliding lid in the cupboard so it was going to have its maiden bake and here it is sweet dough with 50% Pitted Prune Pan Loaf. hope you enjoy it as much as we did.
After some inspiration from recent posts about different kinds of yeast water folks are making, I revived one I'd had neglected in my fridge for about a year. It was originally made with plums from my back yard, but I ended up maintaining the apple one I made at the same time and ignoring the plum one, until now. I took it out - it looked and smelled fine, so I scooped out the depleted plum pulp and dumped in a handful of fresh blackberries. After two days it was beautifully fizzy and smelled great! I followed Hamelman's recipe for Swiss Farmhouse Bread (from "Bread"), more or less. The first build was a bit of a disappointment. After sitting for most of the day it was stretchy but had no perceptible rise at all. Given that result I deviated from the recipe and used yeast water (rather than plain water) for the second build as well, and left it overnight. Much better results - this morning it was billowy and smelled lovely. I made the dough as per the recipe except rather than raisins I used chopped prunes (it did start as plum water, after all). Also, I don't really like nuts in bread so didn't add the walnuts. The dough was very strong and I found it a little stiff so added a bit more water while mixing (in the Ank). I did two stretch & folds 30 minutes apart as the fruit wasn't quite evenly distributed. Very strong, smooth dough. I put it in a clear container so I could look for bubbles. YW dough seems to ferment / proof differently. There seems to be very little action for the longest time and then, suddenly, it's ready! Bulk ferment was a little longer than Hamelman's instructions though the dough temperature was almost identical to his. I divided into three loaves rather than two, as we like smaller loaves for just the two of us (so, three loaves at around 640 grams each). Pre-shape was a dream; this dough is so soft and silky, and has terrific gluten development. After proofing the loaves were still holding their shape perfectly. I baked it in cast iron pots at 440F to start, then down to 425 after the lids were removed. I'm glad I used a slightly lower temperature than normal so it didn't burn at all. When I took the pots out of the oven they looked so good I couldn't wait to take a picture. :) The loaf maintained its beautiful shape throughout, with great oven spring. And the crumb is absolutely wonderful - moist, light and creamy, with a delicate flavour and a thin tender crust. The texture of the best sourdough with no sour! I'm very, very happy with this bread and will maintain that plum/blackberry yeast water now for sure!
Multi-grain Sourdough Bread with home-milled flour David Snyder August 8, 2018 Today's bake is another variation on the multi-grain sourdough breads I have been baking for the past few years. This one has a bit more whole grain flour – 40% versus 30%. Some fresh-milled spelt was substituted for some AP flour. The whole grain flours were milled in a MockMill 100, just before mixing. Because of the higher percentage whole grain flour, I also bumped the hydration up from 78 to 83%. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Bread Flour 600 60 Whole Wheat flour 125 12.5 Whole Rye flour 175 17.5 Whole Spelt flour 100 10 Water 830 83 Salt 21 2.1 Total 1851 185.1 Levain Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Bread flour (hi protein) 144 75 Whole Wheat flour 36 25 Water 144 75 Active starter 36 25 Total 360 200 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Transfer to a clean container, cover and ferment until ripe (6 hours for me.) If you don't use it immediately, it can be kept in the refrigerator for up to 3 days. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bread flour (AP) 440 Whole Wheat flour 85 Whole Rye flour 175 Whole Spelt flour 100 Water (85-95ºF) 670 Salt 21 Active levain 360 Total 1851 Procedures Mix the flours with the water to a shaggy mass. Cover and let sit at room temperature for 45-120 minutes. (Autolyse) Sprinkle the salt over the dough surface and add the levain in 4 to 6 portions. Mix thoroughly. (I start by folding in the salt and levain with a silicon spatula. Then, I use the method Forkish specifies – squeezing the dough between my fingers alternating with stretch and folds in the bowl. I wear a food service grade glove and dip my working hand frequently in water.) Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled, clean bowl large enough to accommodate doubling in volume. Cover well. Ferment at 80ºF for 2.5 – 3.5 hours with stretch and folds every 30 minutes for the first 2 hours. The dough should have nearly doubled in volume and be quite puffy. Transfer the dough to a well-floured board. It will be quite sticky and needs to be handled quickly with well-floured hands, helped by a bench knife. Divide the dough as desired and pre-shape in rounds. Cover with a cloth and let rest for 20-30 minutes. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Place these in food-grade plastic bags sealed with ties and let proof for 30-60 minutes at room temperature. Refrigerate 8 hours or up to 36 hours at 40ºF. The next day, pre-heat the oven. Let the loaves sit at room temperature while the oven pre-heats. You can bake on a baking stone, with steam for the first part of the bake, or in Dutch ovens, as you prefer. The oven temperature and length of the bake will depend on which of these methods you choose and on the weight and shape of your loaves, as well as on how dark you prefer your crust. When done, the loaves should sound hollow when thumped on their bottoms. The internal temperature should be at least 105ºF. Let the loves cool completely on a rack for 1-2 hours before slicing. These loaves were baked in Cast Iron Dutch ovens at 475ºF for 30 minutes covered, then 20 minutes un-covered. I tasted this bread about 6 hours after baking. It had a wonderful aroma. The crust was crunchy. The crumb was nicely aerated. It had a cool mouth feel. It was mildly chewy. It tasted moderately sour with a complex flavor and some grassiness. I expect it to mellow considerably by tomorrow. Addendum 8/9/2018: As expected, after a day, the flavors have melded. It was good freshly cooled. It is significantly better a day later. In fact, it's pretty wonderful. I think the 40% whole grain mix is a "sweet spot." I'm going to be playing with the proportions of the different grains. My expectation is they will all be delicious. Happy baking! David
I don’t usually bake mid week, but I had requests from family and friends who needed bread ASAP! I was also asked to repeat the 5 grain levain loaves but since I like to try different combinations, I thought I would take inspiration from Frank’s Let’s Blame CNN bread and Hamelman’s 5 grain levain. I was going to retard the levain it since time was of the essence, I ended up going for a young levain. It seemed to be quite active and rose nicely in spite of short timelines. I also tried something I have never done before and that was to proof the boules seam side up. In the past, even if I scored the boules, which I rarely do, I still placed the boules seams side down in the bannetons. I thought that maybe I am missing out on a  secret on something seemingly so simple so why not! Maybe I’ll get nice ears. 😁 Recipe Makes 3 loaves Soaker 50 g sunflower seeds 25 g sesame seeds 25 g chia seeds 50 g old fashioned oats (large flake) Soak in 150 g hot water Dough 50 g high extraction buckwheat flour (mill 75 g of buckwheat groats) 100 g high extraction rye flour (mill 125 g of rye berries) 200 g high exraction red fife flour (mill 250 g of red fife berries) 650 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax 12 g vital wheat gluten 11 g diastatic malt (mill 11 g of row 2 barley malt berries) 775 g filtered water at 89F (divided) 30 g yogurt 20 g salt 200 g bran 3 stage Levain The day before: Dough making day: Baking Day Well, I am not sure what is going on but this is the second bake this week that is a bust. I just opened a new bag of flour for both of those and I wonder if that is the problem. I think though that the raisin fennel bread was from the same bag and it was fine. Not a happy camper these days! I am redoing this bread on Sunday so any thoughts on improving this are welcome. I will retard the bran levain and maybe do 150 slaps and folds at the start to get the gluten going. Although it did seem quite well developed to me. 🙄
Best yet with the method and formula that joze had posted....http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/56967/50-wholewheat-community-bake-jozes-version. I took to heart the discussion on over-proofing during both bulk ferment and retard. I also retarded my YW levain. What I consider my somewhat less optimal postings to his thread have tasted fantastic !  As has been noted YW bakes  while fermenting and baking and then when eaten have the fragrance of a rich pastry/cake. I used my tomato YW in the first two bakes as discussed in the linked thread. I hadn't used a vegetable before. This bake used my 6 yr old apple YW. It is SO active and triples in just a couple hours at a warm temp. I got great bloom and ears and the fragrance is intoxicating. Will post a crumb pic when I let it cool . pic just before baking. I have gone back to baking direct from the fridge....I am fortunate to have a dedicated refrigerator in the basement so I set it at " 7" which gave me a 47 F temp. for retarding. my trusty granite wear roaster. I put it in the oven at 500 and just let it  preheat till oven beeps ready. No extended preheat with this metal. I baked the 540g loaf at 500 lid on for 10min then lowered to 475 for 5 more min. Removed lid and finished at 475 for 15 min to 209 internal temp. crumb shots. Shattering thin crisp crust, very wheaty flavor and a beautiful crumb. No giant holes in spite of the huge bubbles and pillowing during the ferment stage but that's OK.
550 dF convection bake with Pizza Stone. Bulk ferment for 2 hours in fridge and 2 hours at room temp. used parchment paper to make sliding pizza onto stone easy.
This is something that I made a few months ago when I wasn't actively posting. I almost forgot it until I saw it again last week so I thought of posting it. These were inspired by Kao Bao Zi, meat filled buns baked in a tandoor oven from a specific region in China.As Chinese is our theme now, I would like to share a story; I hope I will feel a little better later. I just lost a friend (well not really a friend according to most standards) to the Big C just months after it was diagnosed. The cancer was an aggressive one that affected his blood and a tumor formed between his heart and lungs. I really could not believe it until we visited the family.I just met him after a Chinese language proficiency exam and there was an instant connection. We were not even close, it's only the love for studying Mandarin (and languages in general) that connects us but I feel sad and still could not believe at what happened. He was the best in Mandarin in our university and he was an inspiration to us. Many of us dream to be even just a quarter as good as him. He knows many languages too; he can speak, read and write Mandarin (both simplified and traditional characters), Japanese (yes, all of Japan's 3 writing systems), Korean, Thai and Indonesian. As you can notice he has a penchant for Asian languages. I was just a little shocked with one of life's realities of going to the wake of someone who is my contemporary. As usual I did not look at him for the last time as I want that the memories that will remain will be those from the time when he was a alive, enthusiastic and happy. I saw him last March and that's what I want to remember. The funny thing was even in his wake, us who were fans of studying Mandarin can't help but study and talk in Mandarin there. We said that if he was only there, he would be happy to teach and talk to us. We taught each other new vocabulary and learned many things.Okay, I feel a little better now. Here are the buns.The dough was made with a 48 hour retarded levain fed with AP, AP flour, water, sugar, salt and oil. The stuffing was made with ground pork, soy sauce, garlic and chili. I used a chili that's pretty spicy so I cannot put many so I did not get the red color that I wanted. I put the pork raw so the buns will be juicy. I rolled each one into a thin wide sheet then I spread the pork paste, rolled it into a cylinder and coiled it. I made it this way to evenly distribute the filling in the bun. I first cooked them on a dry pan 1 minute on each side then baked for 10 minutes on each side. One was extra boldly baked but did not taste bitter.The buns were crispy on the outside and a little chewy that is perfect to hold the juice. The inside was so juicy and the dough-meat interface was nicely gooey but not so much that it makes you puke from soggy bread. The stuffing packs a great bold flavor but something you don't want to eat on a date. The heat kicks your nose, tongue and throat but it does not burn them so badly for you to grab a glass of ice cold water immediately. The only thing to improve here is to put more stuffing. Very delicious!Look at that chili bit peeping from the dough.I'll definitely make something similar next time albeit with more stuffing. I think I will also try different flavors in the stuffing. And maybe I will try browning the pork for some extra flavor. A chewier bun will also take this to new heights.
3rd batch Same approach and this time I put the dough into the wine cooler at a warmer temp at 8C to see whether I get those nice bubbles as Joze does. No bubbles but the dough was without a doubt more bubbly and puffy. I managed to get it on my impromptu floured teatowel couche....they look a little bit like battered fish...huh..... Then disaster struck and apart from one they ALL stuck to the towel and I salvaged what could be done..that's why one looks more like a croissant in the basket... The only one that did not get stuck had such big holes that my son and his friend had to have it with fried eggs and bacon for breakfast to cover the holes after a late night watching shooting stars in the hammock!!! So...I will have to have another batch with the warmer continued bulk fermentation and see.... Thank you gain Joze for sharing...this will be a regular bake in our house for rolls I think!  Kat p.s. My mind is also wondering what would happen, if I were to follow this approach for a bread? There is actually a baker on IG who bakes using room temp bulk followed by a longer bulk....hmmmm....so much to think about and soooo many ways to approach those beasties!! https://foodbodsourdough.com/ 2nd batch I followed more or less the same process as for 1st batch but with the following changes: 1. I extended the bulk fermentation to 3 hours until the dough was really bubbly and had risen as per Joze's description, however I did less folds and ended up with 3 folds 2 first 30 min and then one at the end of bulk before putting dough into the wine cooler... 2. The dough was at 6c in wine cooler for 12 hours and dough temp was 6.5C when I took temp in the morning. Now, I read in Matteo's Festo's book Natural Leavening that he actually let's his dough adjust for 1 hour to room temp and as my dough was not a bubbly as Joze's after 12 hour bulk I thought I give this a go. I think my wine cooler is colder than Joze's at my 6C setting....    he said his fridge is in 8-9C region?? So at the end of the 1 hour room proof the dough was 16C and out on the worktop it came...oh how sticky!!! I divided again and put on heavily floured towel for room proof at 30min....and then on baking sheets...which again was a very sticky affair...lost some bubbles on the way for sure with my handling.... I am still learning about my oven and I think as I let it heat up for longer than last time the rolls browned much quicker or was it more steam or not...not sure... This is an amazing version and thank you for sharing Joze! 1st batch Oh I am so pleased with the outcome of this...thank you so much for sharing Joze!!!!!! It was a bit of a chaotic day and evening where I had to cut corners on Joze's instructions and got worried about the outcome...so happy with this and have another one on the go as I write this...2 of the rolls have been gobbled up already for lunch!!! I made twice the amount of dough and this made something like 4 biggish rolls. One roll cut across so soft and squashy so I cut the next one horizontally.... OK...I try to summarise what I did... I doubled the formula given to me in Joze's blog and I used starter rather than YW. http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/56967/50-wholewheat-community-bake-jozes-version Starter: 50g WW Organic Strong Marriages 50g Organic White Marriages 100g water 20g starter Main dough: 280g water 200g  WW Organic Strong Marriages 200 g Organic White Marriages 10g Himalayan salt + 60g water (double hydration, bassinage) I started autolyse and starter at the same time but somehow when I use different flour than the normal flour with my starter it seems to take a while...so AL was actually 5 HOURS until leaven was ready and even then a bit on the not too bubbly side and younger but I wanted to make a start!! Room temp at 25C for both. I did Rubaud to mix leaven first with a 15min break and then added 60g water with diluted 10g salt. This turned out a very wet dough...I never have gone as high as 88% hydration!!! 4 X at 30 min coil folds as I thought it needed stronger folds to get any strength and proofing at 25C/75F It showed signs of building strength  and bubbles and I ran out of time and although I wanted to give it a bit more time to get more bubbly and more rise I just put it into the wine cooler at 4C at 10PM. I know that the cooler is normally a bit warmer than display and is around 6Cish.. When I checked dough at 8AM it was 6C and not many bubbles and rise as in Joze's photos. So I upped the temp in wine cooler and I also have it another very gentle coil fold to get air into dough and distribute temp...that was just a hunch.... in the end took out to proof approx. 30 at room temp 22C at 11AM. Dough before dividing... 11;30AM Divided dough (dough temp was by then 16C) and also gave another proof sitting on towel for 30 min and then baked as per Joze's timings. Bake 12:00 at temps per Joze... Moving from towel to paper for loading was a tricky and sticky!!! Could have been disaster and the ones on the right stuck to the towel and got a bit deflated! Baking in B20... Next time I will let the dough finish bulk until more rise and see what this does...however as WW moves fast maybe that was just a good thing....?? This will be such a lovely bake to do for rolls I think and thank you so much Joze!!!!
Am I crazy to serve baguettes to French cousins? Probably, but oh well! Family dinner coming up tonight and I was asked to bring bread for the cheese course. I am bringing a loaf of my flat 4 grain bread 🙄 but since that wasn’t my best effort and my mom prefers baguettes, here they are. I used this recipe as it has been good to me in the past. Scoring could be a lot better but I am quite happy with the shape.
Formula note: The final dough flour: The 1/2 white bread flour is just that, 1/2 white and 1/2 whole wheat. Making the flour 5 oz white and 5 oz. whole wheat. Along with the other flours. The combined flours are mixed with the proper percentage of water, then to rest. The Roadside Pie King
https://stanton-finley.com/weblog/whole-wheat-sourdough-bread.html
Baking when your environment is 10-15F warmer is just no ok sometimes - 30 minute proofing give you just enough time to prep - i want 68F ambient back please - Blech ! These are my yeast on salt hypothesis -> experiment as a corollary to Abe's recent proving that starters don't give a hoot if salt is introduced - yeast was on fire today. See pics of dough here - need to scroll down a little - http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/57019/why-dont-we-normally-include-salt-when-making-starter
I just received my delivery of 25 pounds of spelt berries so obviously I needed to use some in my next bake. I combined the fresh spelt sifted once after milling with my Mock Mill 200 with some French style flour from KAF, left-over mashed potatoes, pecans and fresh cherries.  I made one big miche this time and was very happy with the results.  The crumb is nice and open and moist and the 57% spelt in this formula really shines through with a nice nutty flavor to go along with the pecans.  This one is a keeper and worth trying. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours, and water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 1 hour.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), and mashed potatoes and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Next add the chopped nuts and cherries and mix until incorporated.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 535 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Here are a few garden photos for those of you interested.
Multi-grain Sourdough Bread with home-milled flour David Snyder August 12, 2018 Today's bake is another variation on the multi-grain sourdough breads I have been baking for the past few years. This bread differs from the one posted August 8 (See: Multi-grain sourdough bread made with home-milled flours August 8, 2018 ) in only two ways: I increased the Spelt flour from 10% to 20% and decreased the Rye flour from 17.5% to 7.5%. I also used a high-protein bread flour for all the “white” wheat flour. The increase in dough strength during bulk fermentation was noticeable, but the dough was still quite slack and sticky. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Bread Flour (hi protein) 600 60 Whole Wheat flour 125 12.5 Whole Rye flour 75 7.5 Whole Spelt flour 200 20 Water 830 83 Salt 21 2.1 Total 1851 185.1 Levain Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Bread flour (hi protein) 144 75 Whole Wheat flour 36 25 Water 144 75 Active starter 36 25 Total 360 200 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Transfer to a clean container, cover and ferment until ripe (6 hours for me.) If you don't use it immediately, it can be kept in the refrigerator for up to 3 days. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bread flour (high protein) 440 Whole Wheat flour 85 Whole Rye flour 75 Whole Spelt flour 200 Water (85-95ºF) 670 Salt 21 Active levain 360 Total 1851 Procedures Mix the flours with the water to a shaggy mass. Cover and let sit at room temperature for 45-120 minutes. (Autolyse) Sprinkle the salt over the dough surface and add the levain in 4 to 6 portions. Mix thoroughly. (I start by folding in the salt and levain with a silicon spatula. Then, I use the method Forkish specifies – squeezing the dough between my fingers alternating with stretch and folds in the bowl. I wear a food service grade glove and dip my working hand frequently in water.) Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled, clean bowl large enough to accommodate doubling in volume. Cover well. Ferment at 80ºF for 2.5 – 3.5 hours with stretch and folds every 30 minutes for the first 2 hours. The dough should have nearly doubled in volume and be quite puffy. Transfer the dough to a well-floured board. It will be quite sticky and needs to be handled quickly with well-floured hands, helped by a bench knife. Divide the dough as desired and pre-shape in rounds. Cover with a cloth and let rest for 20-30 minutes. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Place these in food-grade plastic bags sealed with ties and let proof for 30-60 minutes at room temperature. Refrigerate 8 hours or up to 36 hours at 40ºF. The next day, pre-heat oven. Let the loaves sit at room temperature while the oven pre-heats. You can bake on a baking stone ,with steam for the first part of the bake, or in Dutch ovens, as you prefer. The oven temperature and length of the bake will depend on which of these methods you choose and on the weight and shape of your loaves, as well as on how dark you prefer your crust. When done, the loaves should sound hollow when thumped on their bottoms. The internal temperature should be at least 105ºF. Let the loves cool completely on a rack for 1-2 hours before slicing. These loaves were baked in Cast Iron Dutch ovens at 475ºF for 30 minutes covered, then 20 minutes un-covered. Oh, my! This is the best of the current series. The crust is crunchy. The crumb is tender but slightly chewy. As expected, the crumb is more open than that of the breads with more rye. I suspect the higher gluten flour contributed to the good oven spring and open crumb as well. The flavor is assertively sour with a nice balance, leaning toward the acetic acid side. It is not so assertive that is swamps the nice, mellow wheaty flavors however. This one is a keeper. Happy baking! David
This is probably one of my best ever. It contains 50% wheat flour, and 50% mix of light rye and whole wheat, 9% fermented flour, and 68% overall hydration. No autolyse has been used, two hours bulk fermentation at room temperature (30 C), applying two stretches and folds before sending it to fridge for an extended 18-hour retarded bulk fermentation. After the cold bulk fermentation, it was shaped and proofed for another 80 min on the counter before been baked in DO at 220 C for 30 min with lid on + 5 min with lid off to color. The baked load had a soft tang flavor developed over 18 hours of cold fermentation. Crumb texture was velvet soft and the crust as crispy as it gets. In spite of the long fermentation I have not seen a lot of holes in the crumb. I have seen reports by fellow bakers here that long fermentation helps to open up the crumb. Well, I guess there are more variables at play for getting more open crumb structure, which I don't quite understand yet. For now, I am enjoying all the benefits and fun of sourdough baking.
As I am without a Dutch oven, oven stone or bread pan of the right size, I thought I would try this basic bread in a cast iron non-stick saucepan. This is the second time I have tried baking this way. I got a limited bloom as the dough was very wet, very ripe and had no bench work or second prove. 500g Tesco Very strong white bread flour 100g Matthews Cotswold Crunch flour 100g plain white flour starter 100% hydration 10g salt 80% hydration Starter fed 6 hours before mixing. This had just gone past peak. Mixing done the evening before and left covered with cling film in a bowl overnight Hand mixed using the technique outlined on http://www.breadwerx.com/ The dough was very ripe but had not collapsed Oven pre-heated with water tray and saucepan at the maximum my oven will go (250 degrees I believe, as it just says Maximum) No bench work, once at temperature the dough was added to the hot pan and returned to the oven 10 minutes at Maximum and then reduced to 200 degrees Total bake time 40 minutes
I wasn’t happy with the rise I got the last time I did this. Thinking back on it, I think the loaves were already over proofed when I put them into the fridge. I remember poking them and the imprint sort of staying there. It was late at night and I wasn’t thinking things through. I probably should have baked them right then and there but being late, and they really hadn’t risen a lot, I thought they could wait. This time round, I changing up a few things: Recipe Makes 3 loaves Soaker 50 g sunflower seeds 25 g sesame seeds 25 g chia seeds 50 g old fashioned oats (large flake) 150 g hot water Dough 50 g buckwheat flour (mill 50 g of buckwheat groats) 100 g high extraction rye flour (mill 125 g of rye berries) 200 g high extraction red fife flour (mill 250 g of red fife berries) 650 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax 12 g vital wheat gluten 725 g filtered water at 85F 35 g yogurt 22 g salt 200 g bran 3 stage levain and retarded 24 hours Three days before: Two days before: One day before: Dough making day: Baking Day Well the oven spring is only marginally better. I wonder what it is with my recipe that prevents it from getting decent oven spring. Is there too much rye and buckwheat? It looked like decent gluten development... Did I overproof it again by being in the fridge for just over 12 hours? I am going to check the temperature of the fridge. Nope, temp is 38.1 F. I was very careful during shaping not to deflate the dough. I went back to pulling the corners out, folding to the middle and then rolling the dough up. I am at a bit of a loss. Going to try one more thing... I am going to heat the oven to 500F and see what happens with the second batch of 6.
A mouthful of a title...a la Dab !  This bread has evolved considerably from my initial bakes based on Shaio Ping's posts. The only liquid in the bake is the banana puree. I use two levains just because. I add figs and pecans..well just because. The dough is pretty sticky but after letting it set a couple hours  and doing a couple lamination folds it was like silk. I only did a short bulk ferment in a warm oven as it was getting late and I had started the whole process too late in the day. I divided and simply plopped them in  lightly floured bannetons. Covered and placed in the fridge. Baked cold from the fridge with very little discernible rise overnight. The bloom of the crust is typical of my loaves with the free-style non-shaping. The first loaf got a little darker than I would have liked but I modified the temp and loaf 2 is perfect. The Fragrance is almost more than a body can stand what with the YW, bananas and the caramel of the figs. I used a LOT of soaked/chopped figs. 500g levain---250g rye levain from NMNF stash at 75% hydration and 250g white KA and Banana YW at 100% hydration 440g unbleached KA 90g fresh milled rye 110g Red Fife 500g very very ripe banana puree 70g date syrup ( you will find this in middle eastern stores) 70g yogurt 18g salt lots of hydrated chopped figs ( I have used dates and raisins also) and pecans Mix all but salt. Let set. Add salt by sprinkling on top of dough and spraying liberally with water. Cover. Let this all set at least one hour. Flour your board and your hands and pat out the dough to a very flat rectangle. Gently lift and stretch and fold like apple strudel. Do this again and then place in PAM sprayed bucket. Leave for 30 min and repeat. If dough not holding shape do a third time. should be very silky and extensible. Distribute the dried fruit and nuts on the last lamination. Place in warm spot and leave an hour or so till beginning to puff up...about 25% rise . Remove and shape. Place in fridge. After 12-15hr. Preheat pan and bake. I use my Granite roaster and only do a short pre-heat at 500 just till oven is ready. Bake 10 min 500, 10min 475 ( modified for second bake and used 465) remove lid and bake 20-30 min more till 210 or so. Will post crumb tomorrow if I can wait that long ! crumb:tastes lie the creamiest fig bread pudding ever! with a caramelized crust its almost too good!
Hi Everyone.. Life's been complicated the past many months as I've been caring for my mom as she's approaching the end of her life. She's approaching the final runway and talking to the control tower waiting for the all clear. It's been a long journey and most of the joy in life has been zapped out of me for now while we go through this.. so I've not been making much bread and don't recall that last loaf I made at some point in the spring. Reading everyone's bread forum entries has been a good distraction this summer - you're all to be applauded for your enthusiasm and dedication to the craft of bread baking.  I'm posting tonight because I've just pulled one out of the oven a few minutes ago and wanted to share the story behind it.. Long before my mom's health turned for the worse early in the year I committed to becoming a beekeeper to offset the routine of life as a corporate suit with a part time bread passion.. I signed up for a local apprenticeship program and not being one to take it slow decided I may as well get my own hives right out of the gate.. (not exactly the best way to go about this as a novice - but it's been very rewarding and honey bees are good teachers!). First up.. my two hives after being installed.. they sit on a roof top over-looking a cricket pitch.. The colorful painting of the honey supers (the upper boxes on each hive) was done by my daughter.. This picture was taken just after the hives were installed. A few months later (about two weeks ago) I pulled a few honey frames out to extract some honey.  Admittedly a bit premature (not all cells were caped in the frames) given it was their first year, but I really wanted to taste early summer honey (lighter colored and more delicate tasting than fall honey). So I only pulled out three frames.. I spun them out at a friends place and they yielded some great tasting honey! Did you know that in it's lifetime, the average honey bee can only produce about a teaspoon of honey? But here's the thing.. the honey that was spun out gets poured into a food grade white pail from which I filled up my jars. And as I was trying to pour out the last bit of honey int he pail, there still was a thin coating of honey on it that the spatula left behind.  I didn't want to just wash it out - thinking about how hard those bees worked to make this honey. So I spontaneously decided to add a few cups of water to the pale to rinse out and collect that honey which I then poured into a clean mason jar. I put the cap on it and left it by the kitchen window to see if I could get some wild yeast to develop. I've never made raisin water and figured this would be sort-of the same idea. About five days later I had some great smelling hooch!  The honey started fermenting (this is how they make honey wine), some bubbles started forming and it gave off the sweetest smell of peach blended with alcohol. In the picture below I swirled the water a few times so you could see the yeasty bits float around. At this point I took about 100g of this water and mixed it with 100g of whole wheat flour and left it over night. It definitely started to develop as I had some rise the next morning. I then refreshed this starter and gave it another 50g each of more water and flour and had a triple before noon. And with that I had a peachy, honey, alcohol smelling starter on my hands.. (sorry no pics of it).. I then followed this recipe https://www.sourdoughandolives.com/recipe/how-to-make-and-bake-with-raisin-yeast/ I found online to make a levain (without the use of raisins of course) and made some bread dough.. I mixed the levain Saturday and made the final bread dough yesterday. Life got in the way again and I had to leave the dough in the fridge overnight for an extended bulk and only earlier tonight did I have a chance to shape it and let it proof at room temp. I didn't get a full double of the dough in the proof basket (maybe about 50%).. so it's a bit over proofed.. but here was the final bread just before I pulled it from the oven.. I don't suspect the crumb will be much to look at, but I'm looking forward to giving it a taste to see if any honey flavor was passed along in the process.. This was a good experiment and proved to me that there's never an excuse for not making bread when you can harvest wild yeast so easily! Bake happy.. bread1965!
Between a fair amount of time away from home and baking the same old reliable stuff, I haven't been much of a blogging presence around these parts lately. On our last morning in Trieste last month, I stopped into the small Despar supermarket to check out their flour section and came across a flour called Tritordeum, which I had never heard of before.  Those in mainland Europe may be familiar with it as well as a few old-timers on TFL who may recall reading our Abel Sierra's few postings about this flour in 2014, including a posting for baguettes. Tritordeum is a new hybrid grain, a cross between barley and durum, originally bred and cultivated in Spain (hence Abel's familiarity with it) and available mostly only in Spain and Italy and perhaps a few other European countries.  I picked up a 500g bag and slipped into my suitcase for the long ride home. A single bag wasn't going to get me very far and, indeed, I used all 500g on this dough.  No room for do-overs, this was a one-shot deal for me. Somewhat following Abel's outline, I changed around a few things.  Here is his writeup on his related YouTube entry.  Even for the non-Spanish speakers, the majority of this should be understandable: I didn't have enough tritordeum @20% prefermented flour to also make the levain.  Here are differences: Due to the long cold retard, I eliminated the IDY. The dough was magnificently easy and handleable throughout the French Folds, and incredibly extensible during my bench-top Letter Folds.  A dream.  Off to cold retard it went.  And that's when Happy Days ended and trouble in River City began. Upon divide, and pre-shape I realized I was dealing with a wholly different animal (vegetable?).  This dough was quite moist, still unbelievably extensible.  But getting a baguette shape out of it was a step away from trying to wrangle cats.  As the dough is a hybrid of barley and durum, I opted to coat two of the three in sesame seeds - my go to version for a semolina bread.  And even that was a challenge. I was pretty dejected as I placed them onto a well floured couche for the remainder of their overnight retard. I can state with certainty that this was right up there with one of the two most difficult doughs that I have tried to shape so far.  And no second chances.  I unfurled the couche early this morning to find that they had flattened out.  Grr.  Scoring them was less of a challenge than I anticipated, and off they went into a steamed 460dF oven. Surprisingly, the dough was quite forgiving as it baked, and although I am unimpressed with the final grigne (for me) and the baguettes are still flat, the results are way better than I could have anticipated.  And most surprisingly is how open the crumb is.  So far the taste is most similar to a semolina bread.  And yes, the crumb is that yellow. You can read about Tritordeum here. The 500g bag with my bubbling AP levain in the background. Post French Folds, when the blob was still well behaved. 3 baguettes/long batards x 350g And just for fun: Flours in a Porec, Croatia supermarket Flours in a small market in Krajska Gora, Slovenia in the midst of the magnificent Julian Alps. alan
The recipe is from George Greenstein's Secrets of a Jewish Baker, but I'm using the starter from Silverton's Breads from the La Brea Bakery and omitting any commercial yeast. My brother usually won't eat my English Muffins, but I thought I would give it the old college try one more time; he is used to Old Bay brand, and is very picky about his muffins tasting just like them (he won't even eat Thomas'). I scanned a few recipes online for other tips, and one that I used was to bake the muffin for six minutes after the frying process, which seemed like a good idea since these came out so "Texas-sized".  Here is another image with a close up on the muffins:
My first free-form "torpedo" - goes all the way to Arizona! Learned a costly lesson in cooling rye bread...
I had to squeeze in another bake before visiting family in Germany  and as they normally just see photos I wanted to take a loaf with me. I also came across some white spelt from Doves Farm rather than the usual WW spelt and the dough felt much softer..... Inspired by Ru's scoring I gave a pattern a go for the first time! The square scoring turned the other loaf into a spaceship....
I bought a banneton because dough kept sticking to the floured cloth I was lining a bowl with. I've made two loaves with it and it hasn't stuck yet. The first was a 1 kg 30% whole wheat loaf, which I scored too shallowly to get the dramatic relief of my previous 1 kg loaf. It has the most even crumb of the sourdough loaves I've made. My loaves always have a dense area in the bottom middle. Probably that's where I'm pinching everything together when I'm shaping the boule, and popping all the bubbles from bulk fermentation. After looking at so many graphs of growth vs temperature of sourdough yeast and lactobacteria I started to believe they were real, I've decided that room temperature fermentation is both easier and more delicious. I'm not really looking for much sourness. As an experiment I made enough dough for two loaves. One I bulk fermented in the fridge for three days, and proofed at room temperature, and the other I bulk fermented at room temperature and proofed in the fridge. The latter came out much better than the former, possibly because three days wasn't long enough in my cold fridge. Both turned out more sour than using room temperature for all stages. Cold proofing seems like a good way to manage your schedule to bake first thing in the morning, though. I'd rather bake at night and wake up to bread that has fully cooled. I made two peach pies, one using this no-cutting-butter-into-flour recipe, and then because the crust had such short walls, I used the usual method. Except I forgot that all crust shrink, so both pies were quite shallow. The first filling was thickened with flour, and the second with roux. I couldn't really tell a difference in taste, to be honest. The roux pie had a better consistency, probably just because I used enough peaches to fill the crust. The green bits are basil, which I like in theory, but in practice I'd rather just have a little cinnamon in a peach pie. The last experiment was using a blender to grind wheat berries that had been soaked in hot water, and using the resulting sludge in a loaf of bread. I had imagined the blender would create a fairly fine batter, but it made an uneven mixture of nearly cracked-wheat size chunks, and particles possibly fine enough to be flour. I think this was due to 1) too much water, 2) wheat berries being too tough even after soaking in boiling water for three hours, and 3) a not very effective blender. The resulting bread tasted great, though. Next time I'll try bulgur with less water in the blender.
and ramacinata semolina. Ordered both flours. Amazing quality. The pasta is like yellow velvet. Helps that we had local double yolk eggs. Served with a pasta Fresca sauce. Fresh local tomatoes, caper berries chopped, my preserved Meyer Lemons diced, pancetta , a squeeze of anchovy paste, EVOO fresh basil and Parmesan grated on top. Toasted SD.
Nice easy very minimal hands on bread. 200g/400g/600g. The levain was built from leftovers after the lovely date pecan bake and 100 g of apple YW was used directly into the 400g of liquid along with 30g yogurt and 30g of honey. Two sets of lamination folds at 30 min apart and a bulk ferment for a couple hours cause I got busy and forgot! It tripled! Yikes. Quickly shaped and retarded. Again due to stuff it sat till supper time the next day . Baked the usual graniteware roaster 10 min covered 500 degrees, 5 min covered at 465 then 20 min uncovered. Unsurprisingly not a huge spring but the crumb is lovely  and creamy and very well developed subtle flavor profile.
people in jobs with robots within in 10 years........ I would believe them. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=knoOXBLFQ-s
https://stanton-finley.com/weblog/whole-wheat-sourdough-bread.html https://stanton-finley.com/weblog/whole-wheat-sourdough-bread.html
For the complete step by step formula visit the pie king, by clicking on the link below. The Roadside Pie King
Japan, Greece, China and Mexico
I haven’t done a bread with olives for quite a while and while searching TFL, I came across this one from Dab. The loaf looked amazing and the crumb is to die for. Dab was super helpful and answered all of my questions. So I owe him a big thank you for that! The recipe is his (scaled to make 3 loaves) and I tried to follow it to the best of my ability with the ingredients I had available. He used 3 types of starters but I only had two available to me so my bread was adapted to that. Be aware that the prep was a bit onerous especially when I make 4 batches of this but if my bread turns out half as well as his, I will be thrilled. Here goes: Recipe Makes 3 loaves 632 g of unbleached flour 194 g of durum semolina 60 g of soft wheat berries 30 g each of barley flakes, spelt berries, einkorn berries, kamut berries, rye berries, hulless oat groats, red fife berries and farro berries. 625 g of water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 390 g of mixed levain (sourdough and peach/apple yeast water - Procedure in recipe) 234 g olives (Kalamata and black ripe olives, sliced) 40 g sun dried tomatoes 2 g fresh rosemary Starters: The day before: Levain: Dough Making Day Baking Day I suppose they could be worse. I am definitely having a problem with overproofing in the fridge with my last few bakes. I did test the temp and at 38F, it shouldn’t be happening. I may need to rethink my methods. Just as an aside, no yogurt or flax in this one! I don’t remember when I last made Sourdough without those ingredients!
I bought some "Organic Madagascar Pink-Red Rice" at Whole Foods a few weeks ago and wanted to use some of the leftover cooked rice in a bread.  I overcooked the rice a little bit when making it for dinner but it worked out perfectly in the bread.  You can see the grains in the crumb and it added a nice subtle but rich flavor to the final bread. I haven't used any Kamut lately and figured spelt would be a nice compliment and add some extra nutty flavor.  The lemon honey and Parmesan with sun-dried tomatoes olive oil added another layer of flavor. I made 2 loaves but I'm only showing one in the main photo since the second one stuck to the basket and was a bit flat and misshapen.  I did use that one to photograph the crumb shot which you can see is nice and open and moist. All in all this one may not look perfect, but it tasted fantastic.  I had a piece with some nice hard cheese as a snack and it was just right.  This one you can eat with nothing on it and tastes that good. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours and cooked rice together in your mixer or by hand along with 385 grams of the water, until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 30 minutes or longer.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), honey, olive oil and the balance of the water and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours (If you use a proofer set to 78 degrees you can finish in about 1.5 hours). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1  hour.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 535 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 2 minutes lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Had some fun making small pizzas (less than 10 inches). 65% hydration dough with tomato sauce, home grown basil, fresh mozzarella (+ anchovies for first one below), and a drizzle of EVOO. YUM!
I've decided I don't really like the taste of wheat bran in a loaf that much. It's fine up to about 30% wholewheat in a loaf, but after that, I find the strong, bitter flavour of the bran is not really that nice. One way round it is to sieve out the bran and put it in your muesli, so really you are baking with high extraction flour, but for this bake, I decided to try something a little different. I started by using white wholewheat flour, which has a milder flavour than standard red wholewheat flour. The only version I know in the UK is Marriage's Golden Wholewheat bread flour, so this is what I used - no whole grains available in the UK - unless anyone knows differently - so the Mockmill was idle for this bake. My next idea was to remove some of the wheat bran (no wheat bran was harmed in this bake!) and replace it with some oat bran. Add in 7% rye for a rounded flexible crumb and 3% wheatgerm for some healthiness points and I was good to go - via a double retard route for flavour and good ears. The bake went something like this: Flour mix Levain Other Process Thoughts Lance
My running debate with myself over whether to buy a mill or do without came to an abrupt end the week before last when I saw a post about a KoMo Fidibus Classic for sale at an attractive price.  The new-to-me mill arrived early last week but I wasn’t able to play with it until I purchased some wheat this weekend. My first thought had been to make a 100% whole wheat bread.  After some further thinking, I realized that would be more of a test of my baking ability than a real experiment with home milled flour.  Happily, I noticed some buttermilk in the refrigerator and thus was born a buttermilk whole wheat bread.  And not just one bread but two: one using flour I milled and one using some Pillsbury whole wheat flour that was in the pantry.  To the best of my ability, they would be identical in all ways except for the flour.  Which means, in real life, that they are exactly similar. Knowing that 800 grams of dough would fit well in my 8 inch by 4 inch loaf pans, I worked backward to specific quantities using bakers percentages.  The initial formula looked like this: The mill worked flawlessly, turning the hard red winter wheat into a steady stream of fine flour that was only slightly more coarse than the Pillsbury flour.  Ambient temperature in my kitchen was about 78F and the temperature of the flour exiting the mill was about 117F. The initial mix of the flours, malt, and buttermilk felt quite dry and stiff, so I decided to add enough water to bring the hydration up to 90%.  Naturally, I overdosed the bread made with the home milled flour, making it very loose and only just barely manageable.  After a short initial mix, each dough was left to autolyse for an hour. When the autolyse was complete, the yeast was added along with approximately a tablespoon of water to make a slurry.  The yeast slurry was then mixed in, followed by the salt.  Then each dough received 10 minutes of slap and folds.  The slap and folds, along with salt, tightened the dough nicely but it was still very wet and sticky.  The Pillsbury loaf, having received the correct amount of water, was slightly less sticky. Each dough was allowed to double during bulk fermentation, which took about an hour.   Then they were shaped into loaves and allowed to ferment until the dough crested about 3/4 inch above the rim of the pans. The breads were baked at 375F for 45 minutes.  When checked with a thermometer, their internal temperature registered 205F, so I deemed them to be done. There is an appreciable difference in crust color (Pillsbury loaf on the left, home milled loaf on the right): I'm not sure what caused the difference in oven spring for each loaf, seeing how each had the same bake.  Maybe the extra water in the home milled loaf was a contributing factor. This next view shows that the particle size of the home milled flour is just slightly coarser than the Pillsbury flour: Updated with crumb photos.  First up, homemilled loaf: And the Pillsbury loaf: When sliced last evening, both breads were slightly gummy.  Oddly, the Pillsbury loaf with the lower hydration seemed gummier, contrary to my preconceptions. As of this morning, the bread is extremely moist but no longer gummy.  Apparently it just needed more time for the crumb to stabilize. The flavor differences were more subtle than I expected.  The Pillsbury loaf had a faintly bitter flavor note.  It could have been the tannins or perhaps it’s an early indication of impending rancidness. The home milled loaf is slightly sweeter and the grain flavor is more rounded.  It's possible that the germ in the home milled flour contributes some additional flavors that are missing from the Pillsbury flour.  All in all, I didn’t experience a profound change in flavor that some people report but it was an improvement. If I were to repeat this bread, I would dial back on the hydration; perhaps to 85%.  Although the dough seemed rather dry during the initial mix, 90% was rather wet for a panned loaf.  Or, keeping the hydration, bake as a hearth loaf instead. Looking forward, I plan to use the mill frequently.  It may help the bread texture if I drop the malt content to 0.5% of the home milled flour.  If I can locate a local farmer with grain for sale, that would be a plus.  There are a whole lot of new possibilities and new learnings to explore.  I think it will be fun.
Before attempting “true” baguettes, I made these sophisticated looking yet in fact easy to make Epi de Blé baguettes.  Epi de Blé Baguettes with a Japanese Twist ( makes 6 baguettes)
rye @ 63% hydration salty rye rolls. The Roadside Pie King
If I hadn't just read about Tangzhong, what would I have thought about the bulgur that I cooked and pureed? I had to keep adding more and more water, until I had 4x the weight of the bulgur in there, and the consistency of wallpaper paste. I kept adding more because I hadn't realized what I had been making. You probably already know this, but bulgur is already cooked, a.k.a. already gelatinized. I'm not sure why anyone would want an overly complicated way of creating a tangzhong with a wheaty taste. I soaked some kamut berries. Something came up so that I didn't have time to blend them and mix into a dough, so I left them soaking for another 24 hours. They began bubbling, and somehow I thought either this was yeast water or this was going to kill me, because it smelled bad. I had gotten so far as doing the first stretch and folds before Abe pointed out it was likely to be more alien stowaway than yeast, because the soaker was essentially going through the first sometimes very bubbly stage of creating a sourdough culture, when all sorts of other organisms thrive. Abe prevented a novel literary genre from being born: the snuff forum thread. The interesting part about the soaker-in-a-blender technique is that hydration has to be adjusted by feel. Some of the ground up grain end up fine enough to be flour, some not. I create the recipe by counting the dry grain as part of the flour weight, but this time (the second, non-gross-smelling attempt at a 25% kamut loaf) I had to add more water to get the dough to feel right. I'm sure some of the water is getting lost in the transfer to and from blender, but maybe the kamut also absorbs more water than regular flour. The finished loaf has a very moist crumb. It's a bit more sour than I'd like, because I bulk fermented it slightly too long, having run off to see Crazy Rich Asians after the last stretch and fold.
The looming deadline of a blog event, hosted by my blogging buddy Anna Antonia, gave me the much needed kick in the  energy to overcome my dog days' laziness and write a new post. What to do with stale bread? For me a no-brainer: baguette or brioche leftovers usually end up as bread pudding. But for sourdough or other hearty breads there's only one option: grind, toast, and re-bake! My favorite baker in Hamburg, Jochen Gaues, recycles old bread in many of his baked goods (like Sunflower Seed Rolls.) Unfortunately, his (visually gorgeous) baking book "Brot” is so sloppily edited that only experienced bakers are able to figure out how to work with sparse instructions and missing ingredients. One of his breads was the inspiration for my Nice-Twice Sunflower Seed Bread. My crumb collection of many different kinds of old bread What makes a dough with a larger amount of old bread (here more than 13%) so special? Not two loaves are the same, because leftovers of several different (and differently seasoned) breads go into my crumb collection. Freshly ground coarse rye meal With the Mockmill I just brought home from the Kneading Conference, I'm finally able to achieve finer and coarser grinds - something my old Nutrimill couldn't do. (No, I don't get any goodies from them!) I was very curious how my improvised sunflower seed bread would turn out. We were absolutely delighted! It had an excellent taste - slightly sweetish and hearty, with a thin, crispy crust. One bite - and it was admitted to my "Bread Hall of Fame". My new favorite loaf: NIce-Twice Sunflower Seed Bread The recipe you can find on my (recently relocated) blog "Brot & Bread".
Fantastic oven spring. Followed my 1-2-3 tripled it so 300-600-900. Added some extra water along the way to enhance the feel of the dough. There is 100g of apple yeast water as part of the liquid. I had some barley grains so I used 50g of those and 100g of fresh  milled rye with 150g Red Fife and the rest Arrowhead Mills Unbleached. Dough was laminated 3x and I only let it room temp proof till it was about 50%. Same as last time I shortened the bulk proof due to the YW. I divided into roughly 2 pieces  900g boule and batard. Minimal shaping and baked " seam" side up ...I don't really do a seam. So pleased with the way these double levains are turning out.
Here is the combo black rice ground into flour As many know, Lucy and I have tried to cultivate many different kinds of SD starters over the years but one we have not done is a rice starter.  We were looking at SD starters over the weekend and ran across a rice SD starter from Japan and said we have to do one.   We are on day 4 of a wild and black rice SD starter following or tried and tested rye one we learned from Perter Reinhart.    We will do one of Evon's fantastic breads from Malaysia to test it out.  Her sprouted black rice bread is a classic on The Fresh Loaf for those around at the time.  Last time we PM'd her she was having a bit of a problem with her son and had to stop posting for a while.  Hopefully she will come back one day and surprise us with one of her great breads http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/33537/sprouted-organic-wild-black-rice-sd-bread Day 1 - We started off on day one 30 g of Wild and Black Forbidden Rice flour mixed 1/3 to 2/3 rds and 30 g of water and letting it sit 24 hours under plastic lid. Day 2 - We added 30 g each of the rice flour mix and water and let it sit 24 hours. Day 3 - We tossed half and fed it 30 g each of the rice flour mix and water and let it sit 24 hours. Day 4 - was just like day 2. Day 5 - We tossed half and upped the feeding to 40 g each black rice mix flour and water. and let it sit 24 hours. Day 6 - Perhaps not too oddly , the starter smelled a bit alcoholic - just like Sake - very cool !  We split the starter in half and fed half of it like day 5 - 40 g each of black rice flour and water and the other half we fed 50 g of bread flour and 50 g of water.  4 hours later it looked like this before we put both in the fridge. Guess which one had half bread flour in it and which one only had black rice flour?  Tough to keep CO2 in one of them:-) Another successful SD starter experiment.  Now what to make with the bread flour levain after 48 hours in the fridge to mellow?  I was going to make Evon's bread above but now am on the community baguette too.  Fat Black Rice SD Baggies have a nice ring to it.  Stay tuned. Soaked 9% (dry weight) Wild (1/3rd) and Forbidden Rice (2/3 rds) going into the sprouter for 20 hours aafter the 4 hou rsoak - so the baguette mix will have 330 g total of of black rice mixed flour and bread flour in it.  Funny to see the really long Wild Rice and the short stubby Forbidden rice together. Here it is sprouted Overall the hydration ended up right at 80 % and the two black rice lours were 12% and the white flour was half LaFama AP and half KA Bread Flour at 44% each. The leavain was 9% pref-ermented flour total half black and half white at 100% hydration.  It sure looked more black then grey when the hit the white flour before the Biscuit Mix Technique was applied. After the Biscuit mixing was done with the fingers like you were cutting the butter in to the dry biscuit mix,  we did 40 slap and folds to get the levain and dough water incorporated.  We held back 5% water water and let the whole thing sit for 30 minutes to get the  flour hydrated.  We made a well on top and out the Black Smoked Sea Salt in it with the 5 % water to get it sort of dissolved during the rest.  Smoked salt should up the flavor some - no that the rice levain and flour wouldn't.  Here is the smokey black salt sitting in the well with the reserved water. Then we mixed the salt in with a spoon and did 3 sets of 100 slap and folds on 10 minute intervals to get everything Kosher.  After the 3rd set there was a nice smokey grey windowpane. Then we divided the dough in half for (2) 270 g baggies and in one of them we added the 20% black rice sprouts. We used Strutting Peacock Fan Folds for the first set of folds to get them all in there. Here is what it looked like after the first set of folds.  These were small enough we could cover both of them with the SS mixing bowl between folds. We did 2 more sets of Sleeping Ferret Folds all on 40 minute intervals before pre- shaping and shaping - 20 minute later.  We dusted our towels with the black rice mix to j=keep the baggies from sticking and we shaped them fat without any taper on the ends.  We just throw the ends away if they are tapered.  They don't taste as good as smoked burnt ends of pork.  This way the whole loaf can be used for dipping. We got to use our very cool bamboo fat baggie proof holder too.  Just line it with rolled up towels dusted in black rice flour and away you go. Thin baggies will soon proof up to fat baggies They puffed themselves up nicely. The parchment half sheet and the peep fit the Fat Baggie Proofing Mold perfectly making for easy flipping over, slasj=hing and sliding on the bottom stone. The plane Fat Baggie really popped its top and sprang so big it blew out the scores.  The one with the sprouts add ins was subdued for bloom and spring.  They both blistered up moderately after 12 minutes if Mega Steam with Lava Rocks The cracks were wide for one and 'Meh' for the other We have to wait for breakfast to see the crumb. Above is plan crumb and below is Sprouts added crumb Now for the bad part.  There is a bacteria that lives on rice called Bacillus Cereus that are harmful to humans and may not be killed by alcohol, heat to 212 F or low pH like a SD starter.  Read here    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bacillus_cereus I ate some of this bread this morning as toast for breakfast and it tasted fine, I am tossing my starter and the bread away so as not to have any problems.  I guess there is a reason people don't make rice starters.  It was still fun and I hope I don't die:-)  Thanks to Mini Oven for the  heads up
http://www.breadwerx.com/how-to-get-open-crumb-from-stiff-dough-video/ Haven't baked in forever. House temp 74F All water from fridge 66F Flours:KAF Bread and KAF WWW Finished weight 695g approx 24oz Refriderated starter refreshed four times using KAF AP. Final build KAF Bread. 9pm-premix into fridge 12:50am-premix out on counter and levain built 9:40am-added 55g starter, not 50g. Probably accounts for dough progressing (I think) 30-45 mi minutes faster than recipe (but I kept to the listed schedule).  Haveing trouble with the ''rolling" so just did the 3 bowl spinning. 10:15-into new bowl. Dough slightly tacky and looks and feels great . 12:15-1st S&F Oops, promised to take kids to Hotel Transylvania. Missed 2nd S&F. 3:15-Do a late S&F, which was a mistake so close to end of bulk.  Stuck/deflated a bit. I think it is proofed, but decide to let it go the next hour due to the prior deflation, because previous loaves have been a bit under proofed, and wanting to stick to the plan. 4:15-Ugh, did I mess this up. Stuck and deflated some.  Didn't put flour down and dough stuck.  Bench knife worked but hard for me to shape like that . Attempted to preshape as a boule but pancaked and stuck 4:45-Once I tore it onto a bit of flour, shaped following KAF shaping video . Think it was okay but not great . 6:55-Preheat finished (20min) with rompertof preheated also   possibly over proofed? Stuck very badly to banneton liner despite rice flour . I thought I put plenty in.  Guess I need more . Baked 30min covered 15 uncovered internal temperature 212F.  Want slightly lighter crust next time . Next time 1. Lots more rice flour in banneton 2 . Flour on bench 3. Study prerounding techniques 4.  Stay with 'full' proofing 5.  Slight increase in dough amount? 6 .Wet hands helped
Dear Bakers, Dear Bread lovers, I have created a Bread Recipes App on Android that computes automatically all parameters to bake the perfect loaf, sourdough and fresh starter. The App will help you define the recipe you are after for most of the required cases of Bread Making: poolish, sourdough, french baguette. The method is supported by timer for each step of the artisan bread baking. Visit the Google Play Store: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tost.gilles.frenchbreadrecipemaker I am pretty sure the Bread Recipes App will answer to lots of your questions about ingredients, method for the best final result, the bread you had in mind. Gilles
This is a simple bread to make and for rising involves only instant dry yeast (i.e., no sourdough starter).  My reasons for posting this in such detail are threefold.  First, perhaps a new baker might like to see what each step looks like.  (My bias I suppose -- photos helped me see whether I was on track when I was new to this craft.)  Second, experienced bakers who want a break from sourdough starter breads might be interested.  Third, this is a tasty bread and is very fast to make.  (For those used to long periods of waiting for sourdough stages to pass, this feels like baking in the fast lane.) This bread uses a poolish that consists of all-purpose flour, water, and a tiny amount of instant yeast (barely an eighth of a teaspoon). Those are combined in a bowl and then covered for an overnight (12-14 hours) at room temperature. The goal is to reach a nice bubbly condition. Along with the usual flour (all-purpose and some whole wheat), water, salt, and yeast, this bread includes wheat germ and wheat bran.  The first step of course is to weigh the various ingredients. [Note: Forkish uses 3/4 of a teaspoon of instant yeast, but I cut that back to 1/2 teaspoon based on prior experience with this dough.] The dry ingredients are put together in my mixing tub (a 12-quart Cambro).  Water is added to the poolish and stirred a bit.  The dry ingredients are mixed with a whisk, and then the poolish/water is poured onto the dry ingredients. In the beginning I use a dough scraper to help distribute the water and poolish among the dry stuff, but eventually I switch to using my hand.  A nearby bowl of water for dipping my hand helps to keep too much of the dough from clinging, but this is a sticky mixture.  Perhaps eight to ten minutes of pretty vigorous kneading (a combination of Forkish's pincer, Wilson's tugging, and some pulling) is followed by  letting the dough rest for about three minutes and then another couple of minutes of kneading to make sure I like the feel of the dough.  (It has developed some gluten, exhibits elasticity, and hangs together when I pull.)  I then check the dough temperature and put the lid on for a thirty minute period. After thirty minutes I check the dough from the top and the side and then do a set of stretch and folds. After another thirty minutes it is time for another set of stretch and folds.  The dough is beginning to rise and show some bubbles. Forkish suggests two S&F sessions, so now it is time to watch the dough during the remainder of the bulk fermentation.  After one more hour, the dough had risen and there were enough bubbles, and the surface was looking puffy and a bit jiggly.  Time to pour the dough onto the countertop. Although Forkish rarely includes a pre-shaping, I like to include them, if only to promote some extensibility before final shaping.  I pre-shaped into rounds, let them sit under a linen tea towel for ten minutes, and then did final shaping (one a boule and the other a batard -- still learning how to make that shape). The dough then went into bannetons, which were placed in large plastic bags, sealed, and left at room temperature to proof. After a mere forty minutes (remember I said that this is baking in the fast lane) the loaves had risen noticeably and were ready for baking both visually and from the finger poke test. The batard went onto a sheet of parchment paper and after being scored was placed onto a peel and into the oven on a baking stone at 450F.  The boule was plopped onto my hand and then quickly cradled by both hands and placed into a Dutch oven, scored, and put into the oven at 475F. The batard baked for forty-five minutes (with a rotation at twenty).  After thirty minutes I took the lid off the Dutch oven, and the boule continuted to bake for another twenty minutes.  The internal temperatures were about 207F. The batard was a gift for a friend and weighed 718 grams. We kept the boule, which weighed 870 grams. The crust is a little chewy, but not overly, and the crumb is light and tasty.  Yum. The bread is great by itself as well as with butter, toasted, and with other toppings.  If you decide to make this bread, and especially if you are accustomed to the pace of a sourdough loaf, be alert and watch the dough during all phases.  I began a shade before 8:00 am and took the baked loaves out of the oven before noon.
I loved the bread from last week so I decided to redo it taking out the olives, sun dried tomatoes and rosemary and do a simple loaf with black sesame seeds. This was also my opportunity to try to improve the oven spring. To do this, I halved the prefermented flour in the levain and also shortened the bulk and retardation times. Recipe Makes 3 loaves 632 g of unbleached flour 194 g of durum semolina 60 g of soft wheat berries 30 g each of barley flakes, spelt berries, einkorn berries, kamut berries, rye berries, hulless oat groats, red fife berries and farro berries. 715 g of water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 195 g of mixed levain (sourdough and peach/apple yeast water - Procedure in recipe) 30 g black sesame seeds Starters: The day before: Levain: Dough Making Day Baking Day I finally got the oven spring I was hoping for! Getting up at 3 am to bake the silly things was totally worth it! 😁
Hello friends! This is a loaf I made last weekend, toasted oats sourdough is right up there on my list of favourites. Life has been so busy for the past couple of weeks, so I haven't had time to sit done and post... The formula for the toasted oats SD is pretty much the same as the last version I posted here. The only change was that this time, I didn't soak the oats. I just upped the water in the main dough. I wanted to see if the oats would maintain their structure a bit more in the dough if I added them dry, and they did. But ... I found that the dough wasn't as smooth and strong as it usually is. Not sure why, my only guess is that the dry oats might have been too hard for the dough? I really enjoyed the texture of this loaf, its really soft with a slight chewiness too. Next, time I'm going to try just soaking the oats in a tiny amount of water, just enough to dampen and for a shorter amount of time and see what happens... Happy baking everyone!! Ru
When I was in Germany I decided to do this bread when I am back home and was waiting for Maurizio to post the formula... https://www.theperfectloaf.com/ciabatta-bread-recipe/ I love the colour and the gentle taste of the Kamut in this bread and boy I know now why he said to use a mixer. However, I don't have a mixer and that is that...so I had to use some slap and folds to manage and for the first time I had dough on the wall!!!!! I also used some strong coil folds for the three folds during the bulk fermentation and the dough was nice and bubbly going into the wine cooler. My wine cooler was a bit warmer than the suggested 3-4C at 5.5C but it seemed to be ok and dough had a little rise but not too much...considering it was in wine cooler from 3.30PM to 9AM... Maurizio said to use lots of flour when dividing and needed not much encouragement to do that!!! Maurizio said to proof 2 hours but I felt that the dough was looking good after one hour and did not want to push my luck.... I think this bread will be baked more often to sit on our bench in the garden!
For anyone interested, I've been doing most of my progress tracking in instagram. You can find me at @leftcoastloaf See you there!
Hello friends! Happy monday :) This is was my bake yesterday... I've been working on this formula for a couple of months and I've almost settled on a flour blend that I really like. 70% white, 25% whole grain and 5% rye. I'm still working on what grain the 25% is. I'm not really spoiled for choice in terms of flour, but I've tried 25% spelt, and 25% whole wheat and a few variations in between. This one is 25% whole wheat. The hydration has varied from 75% to 85% this week. I must say this has been my favorite version of the dough to work with. I use 2.4% salt. Method: 1. Levain build the night before mixing 16g 80% hydration 100% rye NMNF starter, 6g rye, 36g whole wheat, 33g water. I typically use the levain when its some where between 10 and 12 hours old (although I do want to try using it when its a bit younger, just to see what happens) 2. 2 hour autolyse on mixing day (316g water, 296 white unbleached bread flour, 67g whole wheat flour) 3. Add 10 g salt and 90g levain to flour and hand mix for a couple of minutes. Rest for 10mins and mix again. Repeat 3 -4 times. 4. S&F 60, 120 and 180 mins after mixing. 5. Bulk ferment for another 3 hours or until the dough is jiggly (yes, this is a very technical term!) 6. Preshape and rest for 30mins then shape. 7. Proof at room temp for another 1 -2 hours (depending on the weather, it was cold this weekend so I let it go for 2 hours). 8. Retard overnight, bake straight from the fridge. 250dC with steam for 20mins ,230dC without steam for another 25mins. Result... I'm happy with the crumb on this one, its nice and soft. I've tried this leafy scoring pattern before, but I think I like this version better, with the more aggressive slashes down the side... but I might change my mind next week! Have a great week everyone and happy baking :) Ru
5pm scald: 125 g bulgur, 210 g water, 3 g salt 6pm chill the scald 7pm autolyze: the scald, 270 g king arthur bread flour, 155 g water 9pm levain: 60 g 100% starter, 85 g bread flour, 85 g water 9pm refrigerate autolyze 7am take autolyze out of frige 8:30am knead levain and 8 g salt into autolyze 9am - 11:30am six sets of stretch and folds 3pm shape into banneton 6:30pm bake covered 6:50pm uncover 7:30pm done Crumb was so gooey I worried. I tried flopping the dough from the banneton into the cast iron, instead of placing the cast iron on top of the banneton and flipping it over. The banneton has been getting burnt on the top from the latter. It flopped a little off-kilter. The serrated knife for scoring isn't great, I have to cut multiple times over the same place to get a deep score, and it stretches the dough around. 9pm scald 200 g freekeh with 600 g boiling water and 4 g salt (not all of it was used for bread) 9pm chill scald 9pm mix levain 50 g starter 60 g water 60 g bob's red mill whole wheat flour 9pm mix autolyze 350 g king arthur bread flour, 220 g water 8:30am knead together autolyze and levain, then knead in 9 g salt and 250 g freekeh scald 9:00am S&F 9:30am S&F 10:00am S&F 10:30am S&F 11:00am S&F 1:30pm S&F 3:00pm shape 6:45pm bake covered 7:05pm uncover 7:45pm done There probably don't need to be that many stretch and folds, and they don't need to be so close together during a six and a half hour bulk ferment. All the pictures of beautiful banneton patterns on here have been making me jealous, so I thought I must have been overdoing it with flour. I just did a handful of semolina this time, and the dough stuck, strangely not to the bottom but to two points halfway up the sides. Once out onto the peel, it spread in the direction of the sticking points, so I scored it with parallel cuts to expand it in the other direction. By that time it had already spread beyond the size of the cast iron. This was the first time I've used a peel as an intermediary between banneton and cast iron, and it will be the last. Slipping it off the peel caused the dough to bunch up against one side of the pan, where it burnt. The green wheat taste of freekeh is interesting. It has a bit of astringency. Dry, it smelled like grain moths to me, but because it was a newly opened package, I thought I had probably been erroneously associating the smell of whole wheat with grain moths. Now I'm not so sure, though there aren't any moths or larvae in the freekeh.
The video below is my step by step journey in baking Maurizio Leo’s Levain Baguettes.  It is self explanatory with almost all steps included.  However, I eliminated the levain build and final mixing of ingredients as I’ll take a guess that there are some somnambulists on TFL just looking for a good video to ease them into Dream Land.  Please watch and hopefully you will enjoy the video as well as the voiceover. alan
So.... I've been struggling with trying to let lift and good crumb from whole wheat.  I like 100% for it's health benefits. This is my third try and will post crumb shot later. Formula (give or take) 250 gm whole wheat (sifted) 175 gm water 4 gm salt Autolyse above for several hours.  While doing that I fed my whole wheat starter and poured 60 gm of boiled water on the remaining 40 gm of the bran from sifting. Final dough autolysed dough (429 gm) levain 48 gm bran / water mix 100 gm After mixing in several stages I added water as needed to get the consistency I'm used to.  It ended up being about another 50 gm of water.Did 6 hour bulk fermentation with s&f every couple of hours. Final bench rest (30) and shaping and then into fridge.  However, I put some parchment paper in the banneton to  help me with transfer for the morning bake.  I did this b/c of the collapsing I've had w other attempts.Baked for about 40 minutes, first 20 @ 475, last 20 @ 460. Crumb shot:  I'm pretty satisfied with these results,  Not perfect but improving with 100% ww and hydration.
Details are in the following thread..http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/57222/warm-bulk-cold-bulk-and-then-cold-retarding#comment-416196 I wanted to know whether a warm , cold bulk combined and then a cold retard would possibly get me a more open crumb as I noticed this with recent ciabatta and baguette bakes. The above thread has more detail with photos and Solano was trying something similar. My conclusion is that it is another way to time a bake and make it work but result wise from a crumb point of view it compares to my normal process with warm bulk and then straight retarding. I have to say though the oven spring was great...not sure whether to do with the cold bulk or not though...
Details are in the following thread: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/57222/warm-bulk-cold-bulk-and-then-cold-retarding#comment-416196 It's clearly underproofed, dense crumb, the ear broke (I think in another post someone told me that this was a classic sign of underproofed dough) and not so great oven spring. Lots to learn about temperatures yet. Solano
Today was my traditional day out in Zurich with some of my sistersin law. Stadelhofen is where we meetup and luckily both bakeries I wished to visit were within a short distance of each other.  Kat suggested John  Baker and what an amazing shop. Tucked away in a little side street. would love to have been able to actually talk with bakers but they were very busy. The bread is made from organic flours and the flour bags are stacked up in the shop! locals can even have their bread delivered by bicycle!  they make 11 different breads and the baguettes looked gorgeous. Dinner tonight we will cut our loaf - ruchbrot! here is pic of the bike trailers they use for deliveries etc Then I had to follow up on  kendalm’s suggestion of Luxemburgerli from Sprüngli (it was raining and this shop is right beside the tram station so I couldn’t get a better shot!) Inside I was confronted with this! 11 different flavours to choose from..... they are not cheap but oh wow, just divine - our treat for the day - I think I have gone to heaven!! Next Wednesday we head home and I am looking forward to baking again.  there have been so many interesting posts here - I can’t wait to try some of the ideas. Leslie
Something is keeping me busy these days so I have no time to bake and post. I thought I'd share something that I baked during my review days that I still haven't posted.As you know I love Chinese breads, baked or steamed and the more I love Chinese pastries and all things in between. It's the green onion pancake that is my favorite I must say. Flaky, crispy, chewy with lovely green onion flavor; my cravings get the better of me every time. I really like it that I made yeasted breads before inspired by it here and another one here. By the way, green onion has many names depending on where you live, I've read them as green onions / spring onions / scallions in recipes.I was craving for it that time and I had a somewhat crazy idea that I really wanted to try so I made these for a win-win situation. A green onion pancake is already very very good but I want to make it better. It's the flakiness that I like best so increasing the layers was the game plan here. My previous breads have sesame along with the green onion but this time I used green onion alone for its flavor to shine.I called them baraja from Spanish baraja which means a deck of cards because they look like a deck of cards. Baraha in Filipino which obviously came from Spanish means either a deck of cards or just a single card hence I stuck with the Spanish spelling because it specifically means a deck. :)I made a dough with flour and water and I let it rest for a couple of hours then I made a roux with lard and other meat drippings. If you keep pork fat, chicken fat, duck fat or goose fat at the back of your fridge; this is an application that is worthy of and will greatly benefit from your hard earned delicious rendered fat. All were set so what's only left is the shaping/assembly. I employed a different folding/lamination technique; normally you roll the dough into a thin wide circle, brush it with the roux then sprinkle it with green onions, roll into a jelly roll then coil it into a snail. I cut the dough into 4 portions and this is what I did.For the simple ones, I filled 2 of the 4 pieces with roux and stuffed a huge amount of green onions in them. I closed them up, rolled them flat and gave each a single and a double turn. If you make croissants, you know what I mean.I then rolled them flat once again before cooking.For the complex ones and the ones worthy of the title baraja, I divided each of the remaining pieces into 3 before repeating the procedure above for each piece as you can see in the photo below.I then stacked the 3 pieces with lard in between each piece before finally rolling it flat. So for the layer count; if you count all the layers in each piece minus the dough-dough interface, you got 13 layers (it means the simple bread above has 13 layers and this is triple of that). With lard in between each piece, you count them as separate layers because it will be a dough-fat continuum so it means 3 layers of 13. So 13 x 3 = 39, a total of 39 layers; a standard deck of cards has 52. Although it's not quite a standard deck of cards, the results are still dramatic and fantastic and can easily be remedied by adding a 4th 13 layer piece.So the layers were increased but I used another cooking method other than pan frying that makes this a million times better than my regular green onion pancake. I cooked them on a dry frying pan until the surface is cooked and no longer sticks then I transferred them to my preheated clay pot to bake over pebbles to crisp and achieve a rich brown hue. Here are the results.One of each kind from the first batch after baking.One of each kind from the second batch. The 39-layered one is on the left.13 layers.39-layered green onion baraja.Both has that nice green onion flavor since I put lots, 250 grams to be exact. It has an intensely savory flavor but somewhat sweet. If you like a bit heat, you can sprinkle some white pepper during the lamination, sesame is also a welcome addition; the flavor combinations are endless and I have some ideas in mind already that I want to try. It is not greasy like a typical green onion pancake, it has a bit of chew and is extra crispy from the clay pot bake. The increased layers changed the texture significantly, its like eating a savory croissant; extremely flaky and crispy with shards falling everywhere. And the smoky flavor and aroma it picked-up from the pebbles and the pot when combined with the green onion's make up for a very old world flavor that is satisfying and comforting that stirs the emotion.Clear defined layers but not as dramatic as the one below.Very dramatic layering. It really deserves to be called baraja, I will increase the layers next time to 52 so the name fits it more. When I look at it closely, it does not look just like a deck of cards to me, I think it also looks like a small book with numerous sheets, leaves and pages so I think you can also call this libretto, librito, or librillo. I am so satisfied with this bake and I want to make it again. In fact, I am craving for it right now I type this and look at the photos. Happy baking!Some photos of orchids from our yard at that time too.Some orchids past their prime near our mini "taro plantation".I managed to capture some in their full bloom. Enjoy!
Danni is my inspiration, (fellow teacher, Canadian, baker, potter) http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/57017/raisin-fennel-sourdough%C2%A0 She posted about a Fennel Raisin bread, and I had *just* managed to find some raisins that were safe for my allergies, so I was excited to try this bread. (I have a corn allergy, which is more challenging than I wish) So.... With my new Komo Mill and $200 worth of buckets filled with wheat berries, I have been working on using all home milled flour. Some attempts have been more successful than others. Well, maybe I have finally figured this out!  This is one gorgeous loaf of bread, and it smells divine. In case this looks interesting, here is the recipe: The night before: Mill grains: 125g Hard Red 50g Einkorn 50g Spelt 135g Hard White Mill Spices/Flax (in my spice grinder) 3g Fennel 25g Flax seeds Soak: a handful of raisins in 205g water (I have pretty big hands) Toast: 40g sunflower seeds In the Morning: Autolyse grains and flax with water from raisin soak plus extra water to equal total of 215g 1 Hour Add 280g well fed and bubbly NMNF starter, http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/40918/no-muss-no-fuss-starter ground fennel, 9g salt Mix in KA mixer for 20 minutes  Use folds to add in sunflower seeds and raisins. Bulk ferment in refrigerator for 7 hours, shape and proof in banneton for 2 1/2 hours Bake @475F for 25 minutes in DO lid on, remove lid and bake another 25 mins. Crumb shot, It's delicious! (I might have cut it *a little* early....don't care!
After baking the Champlain so often  I was wondering whether it would be time to give this formula another try...I remember last time I baked it was in October 2017 and one of the bakes that made me realize no I must walk before I run and reduce hydration!!!! I followed Trevor's formula as on his blog apart from withholding 10g of water and use it for wetting hands.... I used Rubaud combined with a short bout of slap and folds.... Coil folds are amazing to manage wet dough and that's  what I used for the first 4 folds in 30 min intervals. ALSO - an Italian baker Matteo Festo suggested on his blog that you put a sample of your dough in a glass cover it with room temp water and put it near the bulk. If they piece of dough rises then your bulk has reached optimal bulk... I tried that and the dough went puffier and puffier...and the piece of dough would not float... In the end I had after 5 1/2 hours bulk at 75F I decided to do a pre-shape as Barney had to go to the VET for his yearly jabs... Just as I finished the pre-shape the dough started floating so I cannot have been far off.... BUT boy was the dough proofy!!! Pre-shape boule was nice and airy and did not loose too much shape after 30 min. Still rounded edges where they meet the counter.... Final Shape was so hairy as it was very difficult to kind of get the dough to do what I wanted as it was ouzing with air...I opted for Trevor's 'puffy' dough shaping technique but the folding over did almost not happen... https://www.instagram.com/p/Bm137eLHWX1/?taken-by=trevorjaywilson Wiggly, jibbly dough in banneton! Then into wine cooler at 4C which actually is more like 5cish....After 4 1/2 hours the dough looked like it had risen and dough temp was 7C and I thought ready to bake..... I find that call when the proof is ready with retard the toughtest part at the moment! Ready for square scoring .... and the dough sagged and ended up in the oven like this with me being reallly quite deflated too... And then, slowly...go on fella..... made it... Very, very happy and can now dabble a bit more in the 80% hydration area....it tastes amazing with the spelt and rye in it! Oh....I need to think about to bake possibly on a tray on the stone to avoid the darker bottoms on my loaves...and dial in temp ...need to ponder on that...
Hi, I’m Zita, co-founder and head bread baker of a small bakery-café “Bang Bang” in Siem Reap (Angkor), Cambodia. This post is an attempt to connect with fellow pro bread bakers, especially with experience in bakery management. I seek encouragement, enlightenment, and even guidance. If you’d like to pass your insights to a growing, primarily self-taught baker, please comment below or contact me privately via TFL or email: zita@bakerybangbang.com Anyways, it’s been 9 hectic months since we launched our bakery. Let me show you what we've experimented with and accomplished so far. We currently have 3 sandwiches on our regular menu: The Smokey (featuring smoked scamorza cheese), Parma Ham & Rocket Sandwich, and Caprese Sandwich. On my own accord, I made a vegan version of our Caprese Sandwich. First, I created "soy yoghurt" (cultured soy milk) from scratch, learnt and applied a few culinary techniques, conducted many trials and errors, and voila, a vegan substitute for fresh mozzarella. I'm not vegan, but we have an increasing number of vegan and vegetarian customers. Interestingly, as an indirect result of making a vegan substitute for fresh mozzarella, I acquired more in-depth knowledge on other forms of fermentation, namely pickling and growing mold. Mr. Zita Head Bread Baker Bang Bang [f] www.facebook.com/BakeryBangBang [I] www.instagram.com/BakeryBangBang
Sourdough Baguettes
For years and years, we go to one of the local country fairs where we go and check out the entries for veggies, baking, etc. And the last couple of years, my daughter says that she is sure we could do better than some of the entries. Well, we will see since she twisted my arm and got us entered. I made a variation of Maurizio's 50% wholewheat sourdough and his Raisin Fennel Sourdough, and she made Nana's Oatmeal cookies, a lemon Meringue pie and a French Yogurt Blueberry cake with Glaze. Here are the recipes:
Oat Flax and Sprouted Barley Sourdough TFLers have blogged before about the therapeutic benefits of baking bread - this has been my daily bread over the past few months, nourishment for body and spirit in challenging times, my therapy.... 200 g mix of fresh milled, organic rye, spelt and Marquis wheat sifted; 800 g organic all purpose white flour; 750 g filtered water; 15 g sea salt; 225 g levain;  200 g  porridge made with organic oat flakes, steel cut oats, fresh cracked brown flax; 150 g sprouted barley.  FDH estimate 85%. Cold proofed overnight and then baked covered 25 minutes, 500 F; 10 minutes, 450 F; uncovered 20 minutes, 450 F.
This is a loaf that came out of Sourdough from Sarah Owens. The recipe is available via pdf file (http://scottsbreads.weebly.com/uploads/1/0/5/3/10536109/honeyed_spelt___oat-08-40-s.pdf) on the web. I followed the recipe fairly closely but scaled up for 3 loaves and I sifted out the bran from the Spelt and used that to feed my starter. My starter is mostly bran these days so the final recipe has a bit more bran than just the bran that came from the Spelt. The dough was super stiff so I added a fair bit of water at different stages. I also used French slaps and folds instead of stretches and folds for the first 3 sets. And of course, I added a bit of yogurt. =) Makes 3 loaves Levain 70g Water (cool water) 53g Mature Starter (100% hydration starter) 70g Spelt bran and high extraction flour Oat Soaker 245g Rolled Oats 481g Boiling Water Dough Total Flour 963g 429g Water (82°F) plus 65 g plus 25 g 726g Soaker 79g  Honey 20g Salt 30 g Yogurt 193g Levain Be sure to feed your starter a day or two before making the levain to make sure it is active. The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day: 1. The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Mine ended up being over 2 hours as I slept through my alarm. 🙄While the oven is heating, take the loaves out of the refrigerator and let rest on the counter at room temperature for about 30 minutes. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Score the dough if you wish. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully place the dough seam side up inside. 2. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, drop the temperature to 425F, and bake for another 22 minutes. Internal temperature should be 208F or more. I am certainly getting much better oven spring since not letting dough go too long during bulk fermentation. I am also trying to limit the time in the fridge between 10 and 12 hours. These loaves were a bit more than that but I am still quite happy on how they turned out.
I'm from Brazil and first I need to explain something about the flours here. For some time I've been making bread with a good flour that I bought in Paraguay, the best bread I've made until today was made with that flour, but it was over and I still could not buy more, so I had to use the best flour we can find in the markets here (there are better ones, but very difficult to find). There is no quality control and there are no different types of flour, as you have in the US or Italy and others, all the flours I have seen here present information that they have 10% protein. That's true? I do not know, there's no control. What I know and what many amateur and professional bakers know is that flours here can not withstand high hydration, even with 68% hydration it is very difficult to work with. So using this flour and after Kat's tip about Matteo Festo's book, I decided to test a different method to see how the result would turn out and the differences in working the dough with this Brazilian flour. These breads were my usual recipe, 1000g dough, 100% white flour, 65.03% water, 2.19% salt, 18.58% levain (100% hydration). Final hydration, 68%. Temperature in my refrigerator was about 5 ° C and in my kitchen during the day ranged between 20-22 ° C. The recipe in the book asked for a higher percentage of levain, but I ended up forgetting and had to improvise. As the final proof would be at the counter I decided to keep the levain of my formula and adjust the time of final proof as the dough developed. Basically it was this. - mix (flour, water and levain) - 30 min "autolyse" - add salt and mix (rubaud) - 4 stretch and fold every 30 min - put in refrigerator for 14 hours - remove, pre-shape, bench rest 20 min, shape - final proof at the counter was 3 hours for first dough and 4 hours for second My impressions: the dough came out of the refrigerator very soft, easy to work, was definitely my best shape. I think I might have left more time at the counter, but I was afraid to overproof. It had been a long time since I had baked straight from the counter, it was harder to cut. My cuts are never unique, I can cut straight through almost to the other side, but when I get close to the other end the blade fails, the difficulty is because I cut into the pan that is very hot. I think it was a good result, I found the crust more crunchy. I got results similar to the ones I have with my normal method, but it definitely was a lot easier to work these doughs this time. The first loaf is the top loaf in the picture. The photo of the crumb is from the second bread. The first one I gave to friends and they still did not send me the picture of the crumb (yes, I asked them to take a photo, which was weird hahaha). Solano
Hello friends!! I hope everyone had a great weekend :) This weekend I baked another (mostly) white sourdough. The formula and method is largely unchanged from my last post except I upped the hydration to about 87%. This was not a wise choice given that I've been trying to work on my shaping and scoring ... but I think it turned out okay. The loaf doesn't look like my usual loaves... I went out on a limb here. I was inspired by a loaf I saw on instagram and decided to give it a try. Usually, I prefer the unfloured look for my loaves.. so this was me trying something different. (here's the original post I saw on instagram https://www.instagram.com/p/Bks-ni0Bu5C/?taken-by=magdalenadobromilar) I was trying to avoid an ear, but I think I angled the blade slightly (probably out of habit... LOL!). I used rice flour to dust the dough before baking, it doesn't burn as quickly as wheat flour and stays white in the oven... I'm happy with the crumb on this one and the texture is one of the best I've managed, maybe the higher hydration helps here. I had fun baking this loaf, I might try this again and see if I can get it to turn out the way I imagined it. Happy baking and have a great week! Ru
I was in London yesterday and at Linas Stores they had this very nice Italian 00 pizza flour which I understand is low in protein and gluten but might give me a lovely crunchy crust....(thank you again for the tip Abe, but they did not have the durum anymore.....) So, I worked with Matteo Festo's low gluten formula as in his book Natural Leavenings and the key difference to my normal process was that he uses much more leaven to speed up the bulk and only a very short rest for the dough after mixing with leaven and then adding the salt. It made beautiful soft dough but I was very gentle during mix and a much shorter and gentle Rubaud. Mix - Very gentle! 68% hydration Start of bulk...and with 3 gentle coil folds at 30 min interval I left the dough alone until the end of bulk.... end of bulk... I loved that dough...reminded me of my ciabatta bake.... 25 min bench rest - final shape - messed the boule up almost as I shaped as a batard by mistake and then just rounded it up and ended up as boule.... It was was a lovely late summer sunny day to I went with room temp proofing although scoring terrifies me and getting the proof wrong! and here is the Double O Boule.... The crust felt really crunchy and can't wait till tomorrow to cut and see crumb..... Here is the morning and crumb shot time......It has this amazing creamy white colour and the crust is really crunchy and thin.. Made me think of a white canvas and what to put on it.......purple blackberry jam of course!!!!  Love this experiment but miss the taste of rye and spelt....
Fry something of course - two somewhat cruller looking crullers - these are #5 and 6. First four got consumed already.  I been a little worried my oven is going to explode since it caught on fire recently and so couldn't resist mixing up a quick choux and crafting a makeshift piping nozzle out of a plastic mini containers. Turned out ok - better than sulking all day - happy baking and thank the powers if you haven't killed your oven ;)
It's been too long since I made some bialys.  Bialys seem to be the forgotten stepchild of bagels it seems :).  My original formula and procedure is here. I decided to use around 28% freshly milled and sifted spelt flour along with First Clear flour in this bake.  I also use freshly caramelized onions instead of dehydrated onions and added some balsamic vinegar to finish them off.  I under-estimated how much onions to sub for the dehydrated and did not have enough for all the biayls so I used some shredded cheese instead.  Not a bad replacement if you ask me. I also bulk fermented the dough instead of shaping the bialys and then refrigerating them.  Other than that you can follow along with the original instructions.  For the dough I bulk fermented after 3 rounds of S & F's every 25 minutes and let the dough sit out at 78 degrees for 1.5 hours total.  The next day I took the dough out and let it sit for around 1.5 hours at 78 degrees, shaped them into balls, let them proof for 1.5 hours, shaped per original recipe and baked. The fresh caramelized onions really added a nice sweet flavor to these and were worth trying. Download the Formula here.
https://www.saveur.com/vote-2018-saveur-blog-awards You can vote every day
I have started feeding my levain with semolina. I had forgotten how much it loves it... grows so fast triples in a couple hours. This is another 1-2-3  tripled with additional water . I don’t measure but probably 100 g . The barley ,I think, is responsible for the incredible taste of the last bake and the color of the finished bread. Will report when it is cut. 300g 100% hydration semolina fed levain 600g water ( no YW ) at least 100g extra to hydrate flour and salt and countertop 900 g mixed flours——- 100 g milled barley, 200g milled rye, and 600g KA bread flour 40g yogurt 60g honey 18 g salt Mix all but salt just til wet. Let set one hour. Fold in salt misted with water using a large rubber spatula.  Place in PAM sprayed bucket and let rest 30 min. Dough turned out on wet counter patted out to huge rectangle about 1/2” thick. Dough very extensible and had gotten poofy in bucket. Folded up left to right like strudel then folded top over and bottom up and placed in bucket one hour. Removed and patted out again.... amazing gluten sheath at this point and dough very poofy. Same folding procedure and back in bucket for one hour. Barely 25% growth but very very light. Turned out onto floured counter divided two approx 900 g pieces. Lightly shaped by pulling in four sides to make boule and folding to make rough shaped batard and placed in banneton seam down. Covered and retarded 12 h. Pictures tell the rest. Graniteware roaster at 500 while oven preheats approximately 15 min. Bake 10 min at 500 covered then 10 min at 475 still covered then 25 min uncovered at 475. Ears and musical crackles . Stopped using ice cubes awhile back... not needed. Amazing gluten development with almost no hands on. Very little bulk proof.
Or at least upping the hydration.  My first two runs had the hydration at the prescribed 73% and then 70%.  That first at 73 presented issues with a too sticky dough being difficult to shape and then to extricate from a heavily floured couche.  The subsequent run at 70 yielded much better results as I documented earlier.Not being satisfied enough with not being satisfied enough, and with a "lot" more experience, I threw some caution to the wind and ran with a 75% hydration.  The dough unsurprisingly was wetter to begin my pinch and folds and then French Folds, but once I breached the 20 FF mark everything settled down and continued as documented before.  I could have had some better scores on two of these, particularly at the first two entries of the blade, in fact on the initial scores of all four baguettes.  But overall I'd classify this run as a success.The dough was as soft and compliant as could be during the shaping and maintained a very workable and soft slackness to it.  In many ways it was quite a positive experience shaping these.  As soft as newly-fallen snow and the dough just about rolled itself out.Again onto a well floured couche.  No problems releasing them from the couche to get onto the hand peel.Notes: Takeways. Getting ready to load Steam released, baguettes rotated. Top view. Waveforms. Bird's eye view of crumb. Snail's eye view of crumb Considering the difficulty experienced in the first 73% run, I can say that I am pleased with the outcome. alan
I could save the crumb somehow but this was a tricky bake...literally the dough stuck on the couche and I had to peel it off..you can see how  the optimist inside me even tried to score.....ha. ha. ha......one baguette I ate out of frustration straight away to destroy evidence while it was warm and Pat was my partner in crime! Barney needs to loose  weight and was not allowed a crumb and Jacob was at school! Two remained... It all started so well...nice looking dough from over night cold bulk.... but it was sticky like...and just about managed it on the floured kitchen towel...and yes I did have to use flour Alan! Well....the towel was so well floured and maybe an indication how sticky this dough was at 73% hydration. It was ok last time so who knows what happened...my hunch is that I let the warm bulk go too far... Oh, I was so flustered by the whole thing that I steamed the oven too early and because the sticks ended up too long I almost botched up the loading too and dropped the dough. If anyone would have filmed me it would have been a good laugh.... Well...I have to try that again....another day!
was one of the best things that ever happened!!! Rus's Borodinsky 1940 A perfect birthday gift for mom....slicing birthday bread for son (the baby in my avatar, the one who called me "evil mom")... Tartine Country
8:30pm toast 68 g oats, soak in 133 g cider and 3 g salt, refrigerate 9:00pm mix levain: 28 g starter, 33 g bread flour, 33 g water 9:00pm mix autolyze: 85 g oat flour, 340 g bread flour, 282 g cider 7:30am remove oats from fridge 8:15am knead together autolyze, levain, oats, and 9 g salt 8:50am S&F 9:30am S&F 10:15am S&F 11:15am S&F 12:25pm S&F 1:25pm S&F 3:50pm shape, coat outside with quick oats 7:20pm bake covered 7:40pm uncover 8:20pm done Bob's Red Mill steel cut quick oats for the soaker (they're still fairly coarse), regular quick oats for the crust. The crumb is a bit tight, possibly because of the oat flour? The flavor of oats definitely comes through, but I couldn't taste apple or anything else from the cider, which was Portland Cider Company Apple. I followed dabrownman's instructions and used parchment paper to get from banneton to combo cooker, which made scoring less stressful.
Group Bake # 2 Spiced Honey Rye Group Bake # 2 Spiced Honey Rye
I am still jet lagged after 2 longhaul flights but we were running out of bread.  so over the weekend I dug my starter out of the refridgerator, refreshed it and then built enough 100% hydration levain for 2 loaves.  I used some bran left over from earlier bakes as well.  My brain isn’t yet upto much so I stuck with the 1:2:3 formula making 1 all white loaf and 1 loaf with 25% rye. After 30 minute autolyse I added levain to the rye dough, mixed it a bit then did 100 SLAFs. Dough was quite sticky but came together well enough. At this point I left it to rest and repeated the process on the white dough.  The white dough was very soft but easy to work with. Now I went back to the rye dough, added salt with about a tspn extra water and did another 100-110 SLAFs.  Dough much better now, not so sticky and the little extra water helped with the texture.  Left to rest while I repeated the process with the white dough but did not need to add any further water. During bulk ferment I did 4 sets of coil folds 30 minutes apart then left dough to did it’s thing.  Once dough was looking a bit poofy, I decided I had to risk it as the jet lag was kicking in again so I preshapped and bench rested for 30 minutes. I tried extra hard with shaping - trying for good structure so dough would hold it shape. Planned on bench rest of at least and hour after shaping but at 45 minutes I hit the wall and needed to go to bed.  so popped both lots into he fridge and baked them early this morning. Preheated oven to 250°C but turned it down to 225° C with convection, 15 mins lid on DO and 15 mins lid off.   Really happy how they came out of the oven.  Cut one for lunch too. Crumb shot. left hand one is 25% rye. Happy with the crumb on both. Yes they were both simple loaves but I paid extra attention to several things. Maturity of levain - not sure if I understood this right, will reread but the overal levain weight had dropped by 2 grams and it certainly looked good to use. The number of slap and folds. Last bake I did 300 SLAPs  but felt it was too many so dropped back. I think it is better this time. Timing of salt addition. Normally I would add salt when I add the levain. This time I did it i. the middle of the SLAPs and I could see the dough tightening up. Shaping - really keen to get good volume and height and minimize spreading. The white in particular had come out well with nice rounded shoulders. The rye one a little flatter but not too bad. Final proof - my fridge is colder these days and I think fermentation is slowing a bit to fast. I think the bench rest after shaping before retarding is helping. So still much to think about, but overall this was a good bake.  It is sooo good to bake again. Bake happy everyone. Leslie
A warm greeting to all the people those passionate about the art of the bakery and pastry. With the due permission of the administrators of thefreshloaf.com, we would like to ask you to support our project, which is exposed in the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter, with the intention of raising the necessary funds to be able to carry it out. It's an innovative attachment that will radically change for the better the way to knead bread at home. The attachment is designed to fit comfortably and quickly to the head of the stand mixers for domestic use, and as they say, an image is worth a thousand words, here we leave one with all the important details. And finally to say you that we would greatly appreciate your collaboration, either contributing some money, and / or sharing the link of our crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter platform through the leading social networking and other media, related to the bakery and pastry. https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/kn-tool/the-kn-tool-convert-your-stand-mixer-in-the-best-k?ref=user_menu Thank you very much in advance. The Kn-Tool team P.S. It's in your hands, in those of everyone's lovers of the bakery, that this project sees the light or stays in the book of oblivion forever.
Good Cooking for the Heart and Soul
We had a holiday last Friday, so a longer weekend, I've never made so many breads! Still testing weak flours and also a new recipe with a little wholemeal flour. There were 6 breads, the picture above is only 5 because one had already given away to friends. There were 3 different methods, 2 loaves each, I'll explain each one briefly and put the results photos. This weekend I tested a tip from Doc.dough in the other post, as he explained, I took an aluminum foil and kneaded it in a ball, opened it again and folded it in 4 layers, I placed it in the oven rack to protect the bottom of the pan . It worked very well! The bottom of my breads improved a lot. Thank you, Doc! These breads were my usual recipe, 1000g dough, 100% white flour, 65.03% water, 2.19% salt, 18.58% levain (100% hydration). Final hydration, 68%. The two that are not 100% white flour are the same %, only 10% of the flour is whole. Temperature in my refrigerator was about 5 ° C and in my kitchen during the day ranged between 24-26 ° C. The oven and the pan were preheated to 250º C, the breads baked for 20 minutes with the lid of the pan and another 25 minutes without cover and oven at 230º C. It is longer than I left before, was trying to get a darker crust, could have baked for even longer, the bottom held up very well and came out not burned on all the loaves. The first loaves were made according to an idea that Doc.dough gave, the method I used that time was asking for 14 hours of refrigerator, so he wondered if it would really take all this time and what would happen if it was reduced to 4 hours. Basically it was this. - mix (flour, water and levain) - 30 min "autolyse". - add salt and mix (rubaud). - 4 stretch and fold every 30 min. - after 2 and a half hours of the mix, put in refrigerator for 4 hours. - remove, pre-shape, bench rest 20 min, shape. - final proof at the counter was 4 hours for first dough and 4 hours for second, the second dough was an hour more in the refrigerator. Bread 1 result (this opening, shape problem?): Bread 2 result: The next batch was the breads with a little whole wheat flour. The method was as follows. - mix (flour, water) - 30 min autolyse. - add levain - 30 min rest - add salt and mix (rubaud) - stretch and fold every 30 min, 6 times. - Rest 1 hour. - pre-shape, bench rest 20 min, shape. It was 6 hours of bulk fermentation. - 1 hour rest at the counter and then put in the refrigerator for 14 hours. - I removed it straight from the refrigerator to bake. The second dough stayed for an extra hour in the refrigerator. Bread 3 result (why did it open more on the top? shape problem?): Bread 4 result: The last batch were 100% white flour bread, same method from my last post. - mix (flour, water and levain) - 30 min "autolyse" - add salt and mix (rubaud) - 4 stretch and fold every 30 min - put in refrigerator for 14 hours, second dough was an hour more. - remove, pre-shape, bench rest 20 min, shape - in the final proof I had to improvise, I had to leave for a lunch, then the dough that was the longest outside the refrigerator and was well developed, I put back in the refrigerator, the second I decided to leave on the counter and bake first when I returned, it was a total of 5 hours at the counter until baking. The one that went back to the refrigerator was 3 hours off, another 4 hours in the refrigerator and straight into the oven. Bread 5 result (stayed on the counter directly): Bread 6 result (returned to the refrigerator): It was very difficult to fit so many loaves into my holiday and weekend schedule, but I succeeded and was very happy with the results. The first batch was very dense, so I think actually the 14 hours in the refrigerator make a lot of difference, at least when I use weak flour. The other breads were very good and especially the 6th bread I found it was even better than the others. Sorry for the long post. I hope it did not get too confused. ;)
Having found that cider doesn't seem to add much flavor to bread, and worrying its alcohol may have hindered fermentation, I thought I'd try milk. I was curious if the milk would curdle from the acidity of the dough, and if that would matter. When mixed into dough, is curdling even something that milk does? The fat may be the more significant part of milk in bread. The crumb turned out tighter and more tender, less chewy. There's a definite milky aftertaste, that mucusy feeling like after eating a bowl of cereal. This loaf is basically granola as bread. Because they weren't whole oat grouts, but "quick steel cut", I felt like my blender wasn't going to have a hard time breaking them down. I treated the toasted oats, soaked in milk overnight and then blended, as part of the flour in the recipe. It seems like oats absorb quite a bit more liquid than wheat, because I ended up adding another 120 g of milk--about the same weight as the oats. Without the extra milk, the dough felt like 60% hydration or possibly lower (the intent was 75%). 8:00pm toast 110 g oats, soak in 340 g milk, refrigerate 8:30pm mix levain 51 g starter, 59 g bread flour, 59 g water 8:00am blend soaker -- measured 425 g, 25 g missing 8:00am mix autolyze 371 g bread flour, blended soaker -- added 13 g more milk, 17 g more bread flour 9:00am knead together autolyze, levain, and 10 g salt -- added another 80 g milk, dough was stiff 9:40am -- kneaded in another 40 g milk, dough was stiff 10:00am S&F 10:30am S&F 11:10am S&F 12:00am S&F 1:00 S&F 3:30pm shape, coat outside with oats 8:00pm bake covered 8:20pm uncover 9:05pm done
Like Ulysses to the Sirens.  Like rodents to the Pied Piper, like Cupid’s arrow to the heart, and like Springboks to Spring Break - or at least to the watering hole on the Savannah. Abel Sierra posted his version of Baguette au Levain a few days ago.  Lovely, and that might have been that!  Except that in response to Old Baker’s comment stating that he would try it, Abel’s reply was "Maybe it's difficult to get this result at home. For better results, always work with professional tools.” Well, if you know anything about me, then you know that I took it as a personal challenge, dropped my current project, and found myself on a mission. Following Abel’s lead, this is a 75% double hydration (bassinage) dough using an assumed 100% hydration AP flour levain.  Formatting the formula in my BBGA worksheet the calculated pre-fermented flour came to 9.1%.  Without the prescribed fresh yeast I employed IDY instead, and found a cobwebbed container of Diastatic Malt.  Damn the torpedos if the Malt is expired, but in it went. Upon shaping, the dough was quite slack but manageable, and again, another dough that is so soft to the touch that it just about rolls itself out.  One technique that Abel references is to retard the shaped baguettes seam side up, something that was a nascent experience for me having never done that before. Scaled to 1500g I had enough dough to make 4 baguettes at ~370g, the dough before and after shaping was cumulatively ~15 hours under retard.  Baked at 470dF, 13 minutes under steam, 11 minutes after steam was released, and 3 minutes of venting. The crust is incredibly crisp and the flavor is soft and sweet.  My crumb is not quite as open as Abel's, but nothing to be ashamed about, that's for sure. If you are in the mood for an all white flour pain au levain, this is another in the growing list of baguettes worth trying. And so my baguettes were baked, my itch was scratched, my curiosity was coddled.  And I am happily reporting that I found no greater challenge to baking these than with any other double hydration dough.  So you too can do it! couched seam side up Steam released, baguettes rotated alan
This was a bit of an experiment....my starter peaked in the evening and we needed bread but I realized that a full bulk would mean a late night and I was tired.... so after the baguette and ciabatta approach to bulk I let it bulk for 1 and 1/2 hour with 30 min coil folds until it was bubbly and showed life and then put the dough in the 5C wine cooler for the night. At 7AM the following morning, I took it out and put it for 2 hours in 75F proofer to warm up and get a little bit more bubbly and lively...I gave it a gentle fold but left it mostly alone... After that I did a pre-shape and the dough looked like holding shape nicely, 45 min bench rest and final shape of that 'to be named' fold on Trevor's IG. Then I decided, as we really needed bread, to go for room proof and took dough 2 hours in the sun... Sadly one stuck to the cloth and I had a close shave with this one..... Scoring this wet dough at room temp was a 'drag' and surprised I got the ear after all....
Why not just use the flour of six grains? I guess for the same reason one mills flour fresh, but also I think the mediocrity of my blender is working with me here by creating variation in the size of particles. I get some noticeable bits, along with some flour soup. I accidentally made a very high hydration dough (80%? 85%?), because I forgot that whole grains don't puree the way that quick oats did. Possibly oats are just especially thirsty. I began with more water to compensate for what I thought would be a lot of absorption, and then added more flour when I saw how soupy everything was. I didn't want to overdo the flour, since I was going by feel, and ended up with a much wetter dough than I've worked with before. The stretch and folds were easier, and the shaping went fine, but scoring made it spread very quickly to a diameter slightly wider than the combo cooker. When I placed the loaded parchment paper into the combo cooker (which is much trickier when the dough is this loose), the edges wrinkled to the contours of the wrinkled parchment. The loaf looks wonky, but I'm really pleased with the flavor and crumb (airy, with a little bit of that soaker-like moisture). Next time I'll use less levain and warmer fermentation, so that a higher proportion of pureed grains can be incorporated. Another option would be to add some starter to the grains as they soak, but I'd have to watch things pretty carefully because I'm not sure exactly how much further along in fermentation this would get the dough once mixed. Also I doubt it, but I wonder if the blender would somehow harm the sourdough culture? 8:00pm 18 g each rye, spelt, barley, oats, red wheat, and kamut; soak in 320 g water 8:00pm mix levain 100 g starter, 100 g bread flour, 100 g water 8:20am puree soaker 8:20am mix autolyze 305 g bread flour, pureed soaker 9:10am knead together autolyze, levain, and 10 g salt 9:30am - 12:15am six stretch and folds 2:45pm shape 7:00pm bake covered 7:20pm uncover 8:00pm done
Recently acquired a Mockmill and decided that Maurizio’s 50% Fresh Milled Whole Wheat Sourdough at 84% hydration would be my first attempt at using fresh milled flour. I stayed pretty close to Maurizio’s procedure, rebalancing the formula a tad for a liquid levain. Milling organic hard red spring wheat: And the result: Very happy with this result!
Hello friends! This weeks' bake was fun for me, tried a few new things. Second time doing coil folds for gluten development (I like it), first time using a "young levain" (I don't like it), first time using a stencil for my design (I like it!) Formula: 160g 100% hydration levain (73% whole wheat, 27% rye), used after 5 hours. [Normally, I'd use it just after it peaks, 10ish hours after feeding. The dough felt a bit different this time, really soft and not as tight. It wasn't terrible, just not what I'm used to.] 294g water 315g white bread flour 55g whole wheat flour 40g toasted mixed seeds soaked in 40g water overnight. 11g salt Method: 1. 2 hour autolyse. 2. Mix in levain, seeds and salt using regular folds with 10min rest in between each fold for an hour. 3. 4 coil folds, during bulk 45mins apart, leave to finish bulk fermenting for about 2hours or until there's loads of bubbles. 4. Preshape, rest for 30min, shape and rest for another hour. 5. Retard overnight. 6. Bake @ 250dC with steam for 20mins and then 23mins without steam. I'm happy with the spring on this one: I didn't handle the dough very well when I was getting it out of the container to preshape, had I done better, I think I could have gotten a better crumb. I'm not too bothered though, the taste and texture are great. The crumb is much softer than my seeded loaves usually are. Maybe because of the less acidic younger levain? I loved making the stencil, it was so relaxing and therapeutic. Credit for the design goes to @sourdough_nouveau (link: https://www.instagram.com/p/BcVR7TMh8AK/?taken-by=sourdough_nouveau) I did tweak the pattern a bit to make it more "me". I almost got super clean lines, but then I smudged the flour as I took the loaf out of the oven, so close... LOL!! Happy baking everyone, and have a great week :) Ru
This won’t be much of a write up because I used the same recipe and method as my last bake except for the following: 1. I used Roger’s Oats with Ancient Grains instead of plain large flake oats. 2. I added all of the water at the beginning which made for easier mixing. 3. I threw in an extra fold but kept the total fermentation time at 3 hours and 45 minutes. 4. I retarded the loaves for only 8 -9 hours and baked directly out of the fridge. 5. I tried baking for 30 minutes with the lid on and 17 minutes with the lid off. The last one is because I feel that sometimes the loaves seem to lose some height when I switch the pots from top rack to bottom rack and vice versa when baking 6 loaves at once. I thought that maybe baking a tad longer with the cover on would strengthen the structure of the loaf so they would be more able to handle the move. Seemed to have worked as they came out just gorgeous! Once again, I am really happy with what is coming out of the oven. I was definitely over bulking and over proofing my loaves!
I always make a bit more Levain than I need because some sticks to the walls of the container and then I would end up short. This time, I guess I made a bit too much, and since I hate throwing away something I nurtured along, I figured a quick 1-2-3 bread with left over durum semolina and a touch of honey would do the trick. 155 g mature Spelt Levain (100% hydration made with Spelt bran and sifted Spelt flour) 325 g water 90 g durum semolina 375 g unbleached flour 11 g salt 10 g yogurt 25 g honey Crust feel a bit hard so I wonder if I overbaked it. It is 3 am so I will see in the morning.
Hi friends, I baked 80/20 mainly white loaves letting it go to 50% rise in bulk based on the recent thread discussing the difference between a 30% and 50% rise and considering the thoughts from Trevor and Maurizio....I realized that I probably was more a 50%ish baker.....as it happens but also experimented with 30% rise in the past... If you go 50% rise then this also affects retarding and 2nd proof and Trevor mentions this actually in his book at the very end....reading it yet again afresh.... Now, there is not that much difference in weight between the two of them but I am intrigued what different shape I get with the 25CM cane banneton (used with a cloth) and the 33Cm long pulp Brotform used just with rice flour. Some people on IG say that the Brotform can dry the dough out more and decrease  chance of blisters...not sure what I think about this... Does anyone have a preference in shape and type of banneton...I quite like the Laurel and Hardy on my bench! :D Kat Oh, sadly no crumb shot as I gave both away!
Now that I've been able to protect the bottom of my loaves well, I'm trying to get darker crusts without burning the bottom. I still work with weak flour, the two loaves were my usual recipe, 1000g dough, 100% white flour, 65.03% water, 2.19% salt, 18.58% levain (100% hydration). Final hydration, 68%. Temperature in my refrigerator was about 9 ° C and in my kitchen during the day ranged between 21-24 ° C. 1st bread, was made as follows: - mix (flour, water and levain) - 30 min "autolyse" - add salt and mix (rubaud) - coil folds every 30 min (total time of BF, 3 and a half hours) - put in refrigerator for 14 hours. - remove, pre-shape, bench rest 30 min, shape - Final proof for 3 hours at the counter and 5 hours in the refrigerator, straight to the oven, bake for 20 min with lid and 35 without lid, temperature was 250º C from start to finish. I found it overproofed, the dough degassed a little when I cut, not much, but it was perceptible. The dough was strange when I took it out of the banneton, even though getting in the refrigerator was difficult to cut, it was kind of soft, very soft. The bottom held up well and did not burn, I thought it was even lighter than the rest of the crust, could have baked even more. I do not know if it made a difference in the taste, that bread went to my mother's house and I did not eat it. 2nd bread, was made as follows: - mix (flour, water and levain) - 30 min "autolyse" - add salt and mix (rubaud) - coil folds every 30 min (total time of BF, 3 and a half hours) - put in refrigerator for 8 hours. - remove, pre-shape, bench rest 30 min, shape - Final proof for 4 hours on the counter and direct to the oven, bake for 20 min with lid and 20 without lid, temperature was 250 ° C from start to finish. A friend came to visit us this weekend and said that he wanted to eat bread, so I had to speed up this bread a little so that it would bake before he left, as this one was baked first than the other, I used it to test how much it was going to change the bottom if I left the temperature at 250 ° C all the time. I let it cool for 1 hour and we cut it, it was very yummy and the crust was really very crispy. This bread had this strange opening again, as in my last post. Happy with the results and tests of this weekend, probably this week I will have strong flour again and there will be other tests. :) Solano
Fellow TFLers, I decided to have some fun this week creating a new stater based on 100% whole wheat and blending my own flour in a vitamix. This is the first bake using the new starter. It is a small loaf containing, 280 gr total flour, 73% hydration, and 3.5 gr salt. The flour mix was 60% white flour (11% protein) and 40% home blended whole wheat. I did not blend the berries too  fine to avoid overheating, so there was a lot wheat bran visible particles. I prepared a stiff levain at 60% hydration, which had 15 g whole wheat starter at 100% hydration and 30 gr whole wheat flour. Bulk fermented for 4 hours and short retarded in the fridge after shaping for another 5 hours. I baked it straight out of the fridge in cold oven initially. Overall the result was quite positive including crispy crust, soft crumb and subtle flavors. Even though I am not actively blogging or commenting, I have been following you all and checking out all nice pictures posted every day. Happy Baking
Sourdough donuts....some coated with cinnamon sugar, some with a cardamom honey glaze.  I used an egg, milk, sugar, butter dough with a sourdough levain; slap and folded, proofed at room temperature for 5 hours; refrigerated over night; rolled/cut into rounds and proofed at room temperature for another 2 hours before deep frying at 350 F for about 2 minutes per side.  I didn't spend a lot of time folding and shaping each donut so they turned out pretty "rustic" looking but I think they tasted pretty good, nice soft bready texture too.
This is not my first baguette, but definitely the best effort.  Used Hamelman’s Baguette with poolish.  I have upped the hydration a bit to 72% and replaced a bit of flour with some soya flour 2% (after reading Abel’s comment I thought why not!) so here we go..Last night mixed poolish and left overnight.  156 g flour + 156 g water + 0.3 g instant yeastToday: Mid morning poolish looking good, mixed final dough ingredients together and added poolish. 301 g flour + 7 g gluten flour + 9 g soya flour + 9.5 g salt + 1.5g instant yeast. 100 SLAFs, rest for 5 minutes then another 110 SAFs.  Dough was very soft and didn’t feel really smooth until second batch of SLAFs. Final dough temperature 25°C, room temperature  about 22 - 23°c. Although Hamelman says do 1 fold after an hour, I decided to do 3 x coil folds 30 minutes apart. I kept to the 2 hour BF though. Dough was definitely poofy and risen.  So I tipped dough out and divided into 3, supposedly each 275 g  - don’t know where it went but 3 dough balls were only 260 g each! Did a sort of preshape and rested only about 10 minutes.  Final shaping was a bit hit and miss. I wanted to have a quick look at SFBI video but wouldn’t you know it, the internet went down!!! Anyway tried to remember. I think I should have rested dough longer but got there in the end.  Used my couche, covered with wet towel and left to proof.  At the 1 hour mark, I popped the dough in the fridge as I wanted it a bit cooler for scoring.  After about 20 minutes I checked with finger poke which indicated the dough was ready.  Baked 20 minutes with steam at about 430°F. I know they aren’t perfect but I am reasonably happy with them. The scores didn’t open properly and as you can see, the middle one had a blowout instead.  It’s funny, since doing SLAFs (200 approx) I find I am having much much less trouble with shaping - dough is definitely easier to handle and less sticky.Next time - same formula I think (baguettes are light as anything), tighter preshape and definitely longer and retard dough longer so scoring is easier.Will post crumb shot once I cut one, maybe tomorrow. Leslie
Objective: To see how the length of bench proof after shaping (before retardation) impacts on crumb.  So here is my formula  & method for 2 kg dough (enough for 5 x 400g batards): Levain:  Refreshed yesterday, final build overnight.34 g starter + 20 g wheat bran + 160 g water  + 140 g flour Today 11 am:  Autolyse 45 minutes662 g flour + 282 g wholewheat freshly ground + 26 g gluten + 654 g water 11.45 am add levain.  squished dough out and smeared levain over, dimpled it in and folded dough - a bit like laminating.  repeated the folding then did 100 SLAFs. dough came together nicely but I felt it needed a little more water, so after resting it for 5 minutes I patted it out, sprinkled the 20 g salt over it as well as another 20 g water. folded it all up again and did another 110 SLAFs. Dough felt really good and was no longer sticking to everything. After 30 minutes I did 5 coil folds, rested 30 minutes and repeated the coil folds.  At this point I got interrupted and the next coil fold was 45 minutes later.   the 4th & final set of coil folds were done 45 minutes later again .  About an hour and a quarter later, dough was somewhere in the region of 30-50% risen, surface was domed and here were surface bubbles.  Divided the dough into 5 and preshaped each into an oblong and rolled it up. Rested 30 minutes before final shaping.  Decided to try Trevor’s “un named shaping” method which is nice and simple.  I tried to treat each loaf the same. These photos are all just before loaves retarded. The first loaf I shaped was left on bench post shaping for 120 minutes The second loaf was left for 90 minutes The third loaf for 60 minutes The 4th loaf for 30 minutes The 5th and final loaf was shaped and popped straight into the fridge. All tucked up and ready for sleeping! Tomorrow morning I will bake them one after the other.  I had hoped for 10 - 11 hour retard but things went really well so they will actually get 14 hours in the fridge before baking.  Fingers crossed that the fridge stays cold enough to hold them.  Just looking at them when I made the photos, I think 2 hours was too long and that 1 hour or even 1.5 hours would be better. Just had a quick look at one of loaves, so far so good and fridge temperature is nearly back to 4 degrees C. More photos and the actual bake tomorrow Leslie
I haven't baked bread in awhile. When I do, we eat way too much and I have a beach wedding coming up that I need to prepare for. So, why am I posting here? Because I have interior musings that nobody on any other site would be interested to hear. I'm here to gather with other bread nerds about something that has been occupying my mind for the past several weeks. Here it is...I love my Brod & Taylor proofer. No, this is not a commercial. Yes, I paid full price for it. No, nobody at that company has ever heard of me and I have no social clout such that they would even care what I have to say about this. Why bother mentioning this here?  (Other than my personal need to belt a power ballad of love from the rooftops) I frequently see people discussing the engineering considerations of making a homemade proofer. Yes, you could do that. For some people -- the tinkering kind -- the joy is in the process itself. I congratulate you, you are a dying breed. But if you're considering that just to save a few bucks, let me tell you, the B&T is the most useful appliance I've bought in...maybe ever.  Its elegant simplicity is poetic. It takes up no space and its uses are many. Here's a short list of the things I have done with it, which barely scratch the surface of possibilities. 1. Making black garlic. 2. Pasturizing eggs in the shell at home 3. Keeping things warm for a party (a 200 degree oven is way too hot and dries out food) 4. Sous vide cooking 5. Defrosting (though this probably isn't safe with meat, but I recently did this with a frozen dough ball and it worked like a charm) A few things I haven't yet done simply because I already have other dedicated appliances for this include making yogurt and using it as a slow cooker. What have I not mentioned? Actual proofing or giving your sourdough culture a boost. Of course, it works beautifully for that, too. But the whole point here is that even though I haven't baked bread in ages, I regularly use this proofer. When I first bought it, I really hesitated. It seemed too pricey for what it was -- a very simple machine. I still kinda feel that way. But it has been so useful that I'm really glad I did it. I've wasted a lot more money on much less useful kitchen junk. Okay...it feels good to share my obsession with someone. Thanks for listening.
A new breakfast place just opened up in town and my wife took her Dad who is visiting with us to eat some brunch the other day.  They went without me, so that will need to be remedied in the future :).  They came home with some leftover cheesy grits which were screaming to be added to a some dough. I had made a version of this bread a while ago and decided to change it up a bit using some fresh milled whole wheat and spelt.  I used some roasted fingerling potatoes which added to the super soft and moist crumb. I love the way this one turned out.  The bread is full of flavor and makes some killer toast or grilled bread.  Give it a try if you get a chance. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours in your mixer or by hand along with 385 grams of the water, until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 30 minutes or longer.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), potatoes, grits and the balance of the water and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours (If you use a proofer set to 78 degrees you can finish in about 1.5 hours). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1  hour.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 535 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 2 minutes lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Kale, pepitas, grape tomato, cucumber, mushroom and panella It was just a lovely bread.  Not all that open but OSM for sure.  We got in ;at and rather than try to find a place to eat we just went o my brothers place cut the bread into quarters and  then smaller pieces with some summer salami, cheeses and olives and some fine wine and justd noshed away for a couple of hours chit chatting to catch up and getting to know their new rescue dog Daisy a Lab/ greyhound mix who is a sweetie they are training for a family in New York for Joshua Rescue. My niece makes yeast poolish so she got some some bread to take home to her house.  It's been all about food, wine sand chit chat since we got here and both have been just great.
Greetings Fresh Loaf friends. I continue to bake every week but have been negligent in posting my results. This is my weekly sandwich loaf: I have been making this recipe for a year now and have it dialed. I am also fortunate to be able to buy the best bread flour from my local bakery. Boy does great flour EVER make a difference. I also use a sweet levain at 100% hydration. This is essentially a sourdough starter that isn't sour, hence sweet levain. Here is the recipe: 445 grams fine bread flour 250 grams whole milk scalded and cooled 85 grams sweet levain starter 11/2 tsp active dry yeast 58  grams honey -- boy did the wildflower honey EVER kick up the flavour!!!!! 3/4 tsp salt 50 grams melted butter 2 egg beaten After mixing and developing the dough, I let it bulk ferment for about two hours. I then pre-shaped and shaped a pan loaf, let rise for about two hours, then egg washed and scored. The loaf baked for 18 minutes at 375F with steam and an additional 20 minutes with no steam. Best sandwich bread I have ever baked. Try it you'll like it! Happy baking. Ski
P. Reinhardt 's recipe
This is my second loaf with fresh milled flour. Once again, I turned to Maurizio for inspiration and went with his Sourdough Spelt formula. My loaf used 30% fresh milled spelt, 30% fresh milled high extraction hard red spring wheat (Maurizio calls for Central Milling T85), and 40% Giusto's Artisan. I used a 40 mesh sieve to sift the whole grain red wheat down to high extraction (about 85%). This loaf was 85% hydration. It was proofed in the refrigerator in a linen-lined oblong banneton and baked in an oblong clay baker. The result: This is an incredibly delicious bread and am very happy with the result. Next time I'll replace a bit of the high extraction wheat with some rye, but otherwise really loving the flavor of spelt.
While we all love a nice crusty loaf of bread. Pillow soft buns with nary any crust at all have a place too. Friday night dinner. Mississippi chicken on fresh, home made pillow soft buns. The Roadside Pie King
Hi All, To save time and bake Professionnal Bread I propose my French Bread Recipes Android App for free this week. No more worry about Bakers Math including Sourdough, water temperature, raising time Timer, etc. App Web site: https://to15657.wixsite.com/frenchbreadrecipes Google store: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tost.gilles.frenchbreadrecipemaker Enjoy and let me know what do you think about the App. Gilles
A bit of a come-on, but for comparison the lead photo is my standard 84% hydration ciabatta crumb, as is this next of a full loaf. Friends soon visiting asked if I could bake ciabatta for them.  I had to re-aquaint myself. Rather than make my old standby ciabatta at 84% hydration, I wanted to try another option. A video by The Artisan Crust’s Scott MeGee has an interesting take on this bread.  In response to two separate comments, Mr. MeGee quotes the hydration first as 66% and later as 76%.  If you’ve ever made ciabatta yourself and then watch this video, I doubt that the huge billowy pillow of dough that he folds and then divides is anything like your own personal experience. It certainly wasn’t and isn’t like mine.  If you can duplicate his dough’s characteristics I’d surely be curious as to how. The 76% version makes a fine ciabatta with one glaring exception - it does not produce the large hole structure that we associate with this bread.  I'm personally not too enamored by large holes.  Beyond an open crumb, I really don’t care.  This 76% version otherwise maintains that true ciabatta look, smell, feel and taste.  That’s good enough for me. The 66% hydration version was next.  Amazingly, at divide time, the jiggly blob of dough that tumbled out of the container could just as easily be mistaken for a dough with hydrations of 10% and even 20% higher.  Once out of the mixer it was near impossible to tell this dough from the 76% or even an 85% ciabatta dough when it came time to fold, divide and bake.  On the downside I didn’t detect the same ciabatta smell and flavor from this 66% version.  Maybe it was just playing with my head (and nostrils). My takeaway is that with little, if any, additional work the 76% was the superior version.  And I anticipate that my shaping of these, although already pretty fair, will continue to improve over time. I like how he shapes the dough and then refrains from stretching it until moving from the well-floured couche to the baking peel, neither of which I had ever done before in this way.  With the jelly-like quality of both versions, shaping is a task but doable.  The dough just isn’t what you see in his video. I agree with dabrownman when he says that the holes have no flavor and you can’t eat them.  If you are in the market for a ciabatta with those giant holes, this is not the bread for you. For both versions, I differ from Mr. MeGee’s formula in that I used an overnight 40% prefermented flour biga instead of making this a direct dough.   Prior to the double-hydration bassinage of water and olive oil, I removed the dough from the mixer and gave it ~100 French Folds, with a 5 minute rest halfway through.  The 66% dough is much stiffer as it isn’t a full 66% until the bassinage has completed, and therefore I had to add some of the second hydration to make it workable on the bench. Then back into the mixer.  Both the timing of the mix and the speed of the mixer were far far different from what is in the video.  Mr. MeGee’s stated mixing time is with his large commercial rotating bowl spiral mixer. I have an old Kitchen-Aid planetary stand mixer where the dough hook and action of my mixer leaves a lot to be desired.  I’ve never been satisfied with its performance the few times that I use the dough hook.  The speeds of my mixer varied from “2” for incorporation of the second hydration, up to “6” and finally to “8” to thoroughly finish the mix. The mix with this dough hook is done when the dough provide that familiar slapping sound and goes though successive phases of being pulled up off the bowl and onto the hook and then dropping back down to the bowl again.  There is an awful lot of mixing friction that raises the dough temperature, hence the use of a cold biga and cold water. The 76% hydration ciabatta The 66% hydration ciabatta My version of his 76% hydration ciabatta using a biga formula.  2x ~500g loaves:
I tried to get a strong flour last week, but I could not, I only found 25kg packages, which is a lot for me, hard to keep at home and I use only a little every weekend, I would end up losing a lot of that flour. So I found an organic flour that I had used a while ago and decided to try it again, I also found a different, non-organic brand, and I decided to make a loaf of each one of them. Interesting that the two brands claim to have 10% protein. The results, however, were very different. The organic was very easy to work, the other was almost impossible, since the mix I already realized that it would be complicated, did not develop gluten in any way and in the end did not hold shape, it was very difficult to get the shape and put in the banneton, The next day it stuck to the banneton and took a little work to leave. The bread looks well fermented, it just seems like it can not maintain a structure. I was very happy with the result of the organic, happy level dancing in the kitchen hahaha. Anyway, the pictures speak better than me and my poor English. The two loaves were my usual recipe, 1000g dough, 100% white flour, 65.03% water, 2.19% salt, 18.58% levain (100% hydration). Final hydration, 68%. Temperature in my refrigerator was about 3 ° C and in my kitchen during the day ranged between 25-27 ° C. Method: - mix (flour, water) - 30 min autolyse - add levain - 30 min rest - add salt and mix (slap and fold for the organic and rubaud for the other) - coil folds every 30 min (total time of BF, 5 and a half hours) .- pre-shape, bench rest 30 min, shape - 1 hour proof on the counter - Final proof for 13 hours in the refrigerator. - Direct to the oven, 20 minutes with lid, 25 without lid, temperature always at 250º C
Hello everyone. I’ve been baking sourdough now for about 2 months with varying degrees of success....I’ve certainly learned the hard way that a 100% wholemeal rye sourdough is probably not the easiest loaf to eat! I’m currently using white rye in my starter (I haven’t gone to the effort of properly measuring/ managing the hydration levels yet.....I am yet to figure that out!) and dove foods organic strong white bread flour for the bake. This has been reasonably stable and whilst the loaves are starting to look and taste good, I’ve not yet had a really hole-y crumb structure....there have been a few popping up but nothing to shout from the rooftops about. I think the problem lies in my timings so i’ll Continue to experiment with those. My shaping skills are also in need of work but are much better than they were a couple of weeks ago. I write this whilst I have two bannetons filled with dough and very little rise coming after shaping. For the first time, I shaped with wet hands rather than floured and things got a little stickier than I would’ve liked so we’ll see what happens in the next hour! Anyway, just wanted to say hi...i’ll be sure to post more as I improve and will no doubt ask for more specific advice as I start to figure out what I need to ask! Thanks :-) alex
These are looking much better. They were baked 15 minutes lid on @ 240 deg C and 15 mins lid off. Now if I compare to the warm proofed ones (the cold proof is about 100 g more dough but still..) Wow! huge difference in oven spring Now 90 minutes comparison.  warm proof is definitely flatter I was sitting across the room and glanced at the kitchen, had to laugh as it is so obvious. Crumb shots will come as we eat them. Conclusion so far - don't think I like warm proof overnight, will stick to my cold overnight proof.  Just took the last of part 1 out of freezer (90 minutes) and when comparing size and shape of loaves there is not much difference.  I also realise that my choice of warm proof  spot was a bit dodgy - I don't have a proofer but this was a warmer proof than the fridge, even if the temperature was not ideal to start with, and that is probably why some overproofed, but it has shown me a few things.  Homebakers must often come up with a work around. Anyway, love your feedback on this and the other post.  The final crumb shot for part one will pop up shortly. Leslie
Friends asked me to bake for them so I made a Tartine Style Country from Trevor on the right and for the first time tried a 'Light Rye' from Martin Field's book Sourdough on the left.... Sadly, no crumb as Barney and I delivered the loaves in my new bag which was a bday present from a friend and used it for the first time..ha, ha.... Then I thought, I just up the rye and baked a 200g rye and 300g strong white bread flour loaf today... It did turn out less dense than I thought and tastes great! Reminds me actually a lot of some German breads!!! I used my normal 100% hydration refreshed starter and AL was about 4 hours at 22C room temp. Added leaven first, 30 min rest and then added salt with some water....bulk was approx. 4 hours/30% rise at 75F, bench rest 30 min and then 1 1/2 hour room temp proofing before baking....I put the baskets on top of the Rofco as it was nice and warm....
Using pre-gelatinized flaked rye has yielded the best results. These will be my son's snacks during his debate tournament tomorrow. I followed Ina Garten's recipe almost exactly... "almost exactly" = no change to the seasonings did make the following changes: brewery flaked rye replaced oats walnut replaced sliced almond unsweetened (very important) shredded coconut replaced sweetened one Chinese organic golden silk red jujubes replaced regular dates organic raisins replaced cranberries I used food processor and KA mixer to process and mix ingredients.
Last weekend, we had a pizza party at the barn where my daughter leases her horse. The deal was that we provided the pizza oven, the dough, the sauce and the cheese. The rest of the gang brought the toppings. For us, we made Fig and Prosciutto pizza and Tarte flambée. The fig pizza called for caramelized onions. The last time I made caramelized onions, it took me 3 hours standing at the stove stirring the silly things. I thought that there had to be a better way and there is! It takes longer but there is no standing at the stove. Basically, one fills a crockpot half to 3/4 full of sliced onions, put in a pinch or two of salt, drizzle melted butter and olive oil over the lot, stir, and put it on low for 10 hours. Then, crack the lid and let it go for another 4 to 5 hours. The results is beautifully caramelized onions with no fuss! This made a huge batch and I froze quite a bit of them in ice cube trays. I also had a lot of left over cheese from the pizzas. So between the onions and the cheese, this bread was meant to be! Recipe Makes 3 loaves 400 g unbleached flour 300 g bread flour 250 g high extraction red fife flour (I milled 285 g of red fife berries and sifted it. Save the bran for the levain) 50 g buckwheat flour (I used 50 g of buckwheat groats and milled them) 2 tbsp of dried Italian herbs 725 g water 100 g of shredded 4 cheese mix (parmesan, gouda, provolone and mozzarella) 72 g caramelized onions 30 g full fat plain yogurt 20 g salt 200 g levain (explanation below) Plus high extraction whole wheat flour (local Brûlé Creek partially sifted flour) for levain The morning before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day:
My trip to Paris in June yielded these two useful results:  I was able to meet M. Bouabsa at his bakery for a few minutes and I came home with four 1K bags of T65 flour.  I’m certain that the flour isn’t the best quality as it was the house brand bought at the local Carrefour on my last full afternoon.  Held in abeyance until this weekend. Styled on my version of Mr. Hamelman’s Vermont SD these are created using a 125% hydration KA AP flour levain which accounted for the 15% of the pre-fermented flour.  I picked up a bag of Bob’s Red Mill garbanzo and fava bean flour, as suggested by dabrownman and kendalm, and added 2% to the mix.  Therefore the quick formula is: Standard French Folds, 2 hour bulk rise, 2 Letter Folds, and retard overnight.  Baked at 460dF.  I usually get a darker bake than this, even with a pure white flour mix, but this is a new game for me.  And after the bake I looked at the ingredients and noticed that this was an unmalted flour, something unusual for me and which I didn’t take into consideration.  And I wonder if that is the reason that the baguettes came out paler than usual.  Or is this an expected coloration for this type of flour? 3x330g baguettes Update Oct. 01.  crumb shot added.  I had made an assumption that this bread di not have much of an open crumb.  And although it certainly is not very open it does display some characteristics of a standard baguette inside. I've already reworked the formula to include a pinch of diastatic malt powder, switch from an AP levain to an all rye levain and to increase the hydration to 68% for the next batch. I hadn’t baked a rye in a while.  125% hydration rye levain comprising the 15% pre-fermented flour.  75% AP flour, 5% WW and 20% Rye @73.5% overall hydration. 2X325g baguettes, 2x425g baguettes
this was a spelt 20% Sd with an overnight retard of 16 hours at 82% hydration
Ok, so this weekend, I posted for the first time in over two years, and I mentioned that I'm not very adventurous......and, yet, here I am, posting about making my first ever baguettes.  I have long drooled over the many wonderful baguettes posted here, with Alan's leading the pack.  So, I got a bit of a wild hare, and decided that I'd give the baguette shape a go.  I started with one of my standard formulas - 75% AP, 10% WW, 10% Semolina, 5% Rye @ 70% hydration.  After doing a bunch of reading, and watching the King Arthur baguette shaping video, I dove in..... I made up a standard batch with 1200g flour, autolyzed, S&F'd, and bulked.  I pulled off three portions of about 355g each, the remaining portion was destined for my usual batard.  I bench rested the dough, then shaped, and ended up with this (I floured the bejeezus out of my couche due to sticking issues the first time I used it!): Proofed these up for about 90 minutes at room temp, then popped them into a 475f oven with steam: Hee, hee.....I forgot to determine the length my stone would accomodate!!!  What a dope! :)  Oh, well, soldiering on....... Well, I'll be darned, these don't look too bad at all (15 minutes with steam, 15 without): Crumb shot (I love the color of semolina!!): I was so excited, I had to have a sandwich in the vein of those I've had in Paris (butter, meat, cheese): I'm pretty happy with how this first attempt turned out.  I will measure my stone for next time, will probably reduce the hydration to make for easier handling until I get used to shaping these, but really, I have no complaints!  They will get better with practice! R
Hi everyone! I'm excited to start documenting my bread experiments - after several months of sad, yeasted sandwich loaves and gummy no-knead yeast breads, I finally got a metric scale and promptly saw a sharp uptick in the quality of my bread. I adapted Max Bernstein's Crusty White Bread recipe by giving it the sourdough treatment - multiple folds over several hours, and a long bulk ferment in the fridge to develop the flavor. I got by pretty well with that for another 6 months or so, but this month I finally got up the will to make a sourdough starter using KAF instructions. It took closer to two weeks to really get active, since it's finally starting to get colder up in the Northeast. I know it's not as deeply flavored or complex as a more mature starter, but the first loaf I made (see below) with a 2-week old starter seemed like a great starting point! I tasted it the day it was baked and the day after, and it's ridiculous how much the flavor improved after letting the finished load rest for a day. Now that I have a good starting point for working with sourdough, I want to start messing around with more creative flavors. Maybe a cheddar loaf with the seasoning blend from Stella Parks' cheddar biscuits?
well this week I learned a big lesson about leaving the house when dough is proving in the conservatory. What was originally a dull, yet pleasantly warm day quickly turned into an absolute scorcher and in just an hour my dough was ruined! My stretch and folds were  almost impossible due to the fact that (I think) the gluten was completely broken down (is that what happens?) i baked it anyway and the results were flavoursome (first time adding spelt into the equation) but there was very little rise and they should’ve been at least 60 - 70% larger! needless to say, whilst the crust was tasty the centre of the dough was hard work! anyway, lesson learned....hopefully this weekend is more successful!
This weekend is Canadian Thanksgiving, and as usual, I have been asked to bring bread to the family dinner. Because it is going to be served with a number of different courses, I needed a rather plain sort of bread. At the same time, the 1-2-3 challenge presented itself. So how to combine the two… well, it is the harvest, might as well use the plethora of grains that are in my pantry as well as some flour from the local miller. He produces 100% wholegrain flour and a partially sifted flour. I bought both at the Farmer’s Market and made sure to include some in my recipe (the levain was made with this). The remaining grains were simply milled into flour and the bran sifted out to also feed the levain. I must note that I initially thought “Yay, no math!”. But then reality kicked in. I needed to make loaves of a certain weight because I was selling some, I had to make 4 batches, each batch needed to make 3 loaves, I had to figure out the total amount of flour and how to split that between the levain and the main dough to respect the 1-2-3 challenge, the levain had to be multiplied by 4 with a bit extra so I would have enough, then that amount had to be split up to make a 3 stage levain, I had to decide which flour and how much would be used to put into the levain with the sifted bran, and so on and on and on. Just be happy that the math is all done for you in the recipe below. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Ingredients: 70 g Einkorn berries 70 g Spelt berries 70 g Kamut berries 70 g Rye berries 70 g Red Fife berries 70 g Selkirk berries 70 g Buckwheat groats 77 g Brulé Creek whole wheat flour 76 g Brulé Creek partially sifted flour 630 g unbleached flour 720 g water 360 g 3 stage 100% hydration levain (process below) 25 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g local yogurt The morning before: The evening before: Dough making day: These are proofed and ready to go into the oven. Baking Day: Once again, the shorter bulk and proof are giving me loaves that I am quite happy with!
...Ang inyo pong abang lingkod ay isa nang ganap na guro..!Yours truly is now a fully-fledged teacher.Yes, that's the good news that I've been wanting to share for so long but just couldn't find the right opportunity; since it is October 5 today which is celebrated annually as World Teachers' Day, I think it is now the perfect time to share it! I was just hired last September and I've been practicing the profession for almost a month. I consider my self truly blessed this year from passing the board exam to getting hired as a public school teacher. It's very difficult to get hired in public schools due to the strict selection process and I was even luckier considering that I have no teaching experience which a huge chunk of the overall criteria. I am quickly adjusting to the new environment and busy schedule. My students get a reprimand from me almost everyday that I began questioning myself if what I was doing is right but I came to realize that it was an early sign of developing genuine love for my students that I am here to guide and correct them so they can be a step closer to their dreams.I am teaching 3 subjects currently to 80 Grade 7 students. AP (Araling Panlipunan - Social Studies - Asian History); MAPEH (Music, Arts, Physical Education and Health); and TLE (Technology and Livelihood Education - Handicraft Production - with focus on Embroidery). Who would have thought I'll be handling these especially the last two since I have never considered my self athletic or artistic. :) It was challenging at first but I am slowly getting the hang of it, from actual instruction to classroom management. Classrooms can be chaotic sometimes due to 13 year olds emotional turmoil thrown into a melange of puberty and constructing their personal identity; but l feel I can control them more now compare to my first days which make the delivery of instruction way easier.I once spoke in Mandarin to attract their attention and it was effective. :) And I see a considerable number of students who are willing to learn it; always asking me to teach them whenever they see me, their eyes glimmer even if it's just a simple word. I am thinking of pioneering a foreign language class to share what I know even how little it is.Some gifts that I received from some students during our Teachers' Day Celebration. Even without it, their greetings inspire me more!Although I have no bread or two to share now, I would like to take this opportunity to greet all teachers here in the TFL community a Happy Teachers' Day! Not only those who are teaching in schools but every baker here who teaches every baking aficionado  everything that they know for the improvement of skills and the realization of dreams! I am so thankful to all of you!Maligayang Araw ng mga Guro!Happy Teacher's Day!
We have visitor's from London and they wanted to take some bread home so quickly made this bread... I pre-mixed the flour with salt the night before and put it into 10C wine cooler until 6AM when I just took it out and added 12 hour leaven via Rubaud. I have found that the pre-mix works on many formulas apart from the Champlain as long as I keep the dough coldish..... After mixing in the leaven I warmed up dough for 4 hours in the proofer at 80F. Then pre-shape, 30 min bench rest final shaping and back in the wine cooler when we went for a walk for 5 hours...and then baked when back home from a walk in drizzly autumn weather.... Barney looks like he's been to Mars!  :D Kat
Several years ago, a baking buddy asked me to help him with a German recipe. The formula, published by a German bakers' association, combined rye meal and cracked wheat with mustard and cheese. The amounts, of course, were calculated for a commercial bakery, as were the sparse instructions. I had to downsize the formula to home baking proportions. A friend of slow fermentation, I re-wrote the procedure, from using just a small amount of pre-fermented flour, to preferment plus soaker (for the coarser grinds), as well as a long, cold fermentation of the dough. For my first bread I used a medium-hot yellow mustard from Düsseldorf I was very pleased with the result, a beautiful red golden bread, with a stunning, almost neon-yellow crumb. Pleasantly spicy (but not too much), it tasted great with cold cuts, and was a nice surprise when toasted: a bread with built-in grilled cheese! After writing a post about the Senfbrot, I never got to baking it again. Like my friend Dabrownman, I find that there are always interesting new breads out there, so why make the same, when you can try something new? But then I received an email from food historian, lecturer and author Demet Güzey. The Senfbrot had caught her eye, as she was doing research on mustard. Taking this a sign from above, I revisited the formula, trying it with different kinds of cheese and mustard. I, also, substituted the preferment with a sourdough starter, and reduced the yeast in the final dough even more (down to 1/3 of the original recipe amount!) If you prefer a more assertive taste of cheese, you can choose a sharper one. For me, a version made with sharp cheddar was a bit too much. For the updated recipe, please follow me to my blog "Brot & Bread" (recently relocated to WordPress).
In preparing for the 123 community bake on Saturday morning I hauled out my wooden dough board and gave it a brief scraping down.  My usual maintenance regime is a simple scrape after use, then an airing outdoors in the sun, weather permitting, followed by a light scrape prior to next using.  This time I decided apply science to the "light scrape" residue by dropping the bits (<2g) into a plastic container to which I added another <2g water, closed the lid and waited for the evening.  I then added 20 g each of water and flour, and Sunday morning it presented a decent outcome as shown in these pictures. I therefore conclude that a wooden dough board is superior to marble/other impermeable surfaces for mixing dough as it has the advantage of an inherent reservoir/store of starter should accidental destruction of the usual, maintained starter occur.  It also brought to mind the item I read a while back about one or other community that did not rinse out the wooden mixing bread bowl; the locals simply added water and flour, mixed the lot which was left to ferment overnight for their morning bake. I wonder if, in terms of sourdough genetics, this wood be called a chip off the old block?
After my first positive experience with baguettes last week, I wanted to give them another try (and we were out of bread…..gasp!!)  I decided I wanted to go with a 65% hydration dough this time to take any dough handling issues out of the process.  I also decided to just use a yeasted dough since I had a window to make bread, and didn’t have a leaven built up from my stored starter.  Here’s the formula I used (shooting for 3x 330g loaves): 480g AP (80%) 120g Semolina (20%) 390g Water (65%) 3g ADY 12g salt I mixed the flours and water together, then let that rest for 30 minutes.  I added the salt and yeast, mixed those in using the pinch method, then gave the dough about 20 slap/folds.  I repeated the slap/folds 2 times at 20 minutes.  Then I let the dough bulk proof at 75 degrees in my Brod & Taylor for about 90 minutes.  At this point, I divided the dough, and pre-shaped each piece into a round.  I let those rest while I cleaned up a bit, then I shaped my “baguettes” (they are probably a bit heavy, fat and short to call baguettes, but I’m fitting them into what I need/want, so good enough) and let them rest in the couche with plastic wrap covering them up.  After about 45 minutes, they looked ready to bake, so I slashed them and popped them onto my baking stone in a pre-heated oven (450 on Conv Bake), with some ice cubes in a CI skillet.  Added more ice about four minutes later, then let it go for 11 minutes before removing the CI.  The loaves baked for about another 7-10 minutes, then out they came to cool.  All in all, I’m pretty happy with how these turned out.  I still have plenty of practice to do with the shaping (had a couple blowouts that occurred on the end of two loaves), but the entire process was way more manageable this second time around. A shot of the loaves cooling: A crumb shot: Thanks for checking these out! R
Hey thefreshloaf! It's my first ever post. I followed this recipe from Fat Sourdough on YouTube. It's my second time baking sourdough - I've been using my boyfriends un-bleached white starter which is a few months old now.  I'm very proud of how it came out! Link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0iEiMUinCF0 The dough: Seed mix: p.s. I did have to sub the sunflower seeds for hemp seeds because we didn't have any. Still very delicious! Thanks for looking! :)
So for this 123 challenge, I set out to use up what I had hanging around. Starter (leftover from many thanksgiving loaves) 160g (don't ask what was in it - see note about leftovers - I took what I had added flour and water in more or less equal proportions and waited for it to be bubbly) 320g water 480g flour.  about 40+ g of leftover freshly milled combo hard white and spelt, 320g Organic White flour, 120g white spelt 10g salt I had just finished baking  for thanksgiving (sage and onion brioche for the stuffing, plain sourdough for the table, sourdough banana bread for the granddaughter) and I was baked out...so I mixed all the above together, threw it in the Kitchenaide for 15 minutes  added a knob of butter and let it go for another 5 minutes.  Let it sit until bedtime (about 5 hours) and rolled it out into a rectangle.  While the kitchenaide was doing it's work, I found apple and sage sausage in the fridge that I forgot to put in the stuffing, made some carmelized onions to go with it, and then grated some cheddar on top and sprinkled with some mystery grated cheese that I found in the fridge).  I rolled the whole thing into a log, put it in a basket lined with parchment and stuffed it in a plastic bag and put it in the fridge overnight and most of the day until I got home. (I'm pretty sure it over proofed, but I had very little choice, the DH doesn't "do" bread he only eats it)  I managed (barely) to stuff it into my roasting pan and bake at 450df for 25 minutes lid on and 25 minutes lid off. Not as bad as I thought it would be (with the crazy long fridge proof)
This is the first bake since returning from my business trip to Germany.  I had a nice trip, but unfortunately as usual I brought back the "Black Death" with me and it took me a good week to start feeling normal again, not to mention adjust to the East Coast time zone. My wife has been dying to try making yogurt in the Instant Pot so after she finally made enough yogurt to feed a small army I decided to make use of some of it in a bread. Fall is upon us on the East Coast of New York....well it was around 75 degrees today, so maybe it doesn't feel like it just yet.  Anyway, this bake is the perfect fall bread to have with some soup or as part of a nice sandwich.  No cheese needed as it is inside the bread!  I used a medium hard style cheese that doesn't melt very much which is why you can see nice chunks of it in the bread. I also added a nice helping of caramelized onions which seem to have melted into the final dough.  Next time I will add some to the outside of the bread to really taste the sweet onion flavor. Beer added a nice complex flavor and went perfectly with the fresh milled rye and spelt flour.  This one is tasty and good enough to eat with nothing on it, but a little butter won't hurt it either. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours, and beer together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 30 minutes to an hour.  Next add the salt, and starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), and  mix on low for 4 minutes.  Add the cheese and onions and mix for about 30 seconds.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 hour.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take around 1.5 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock.  (Note: the fresh spelt and rye combo really ferments quickly so don't let it go too long or you may end up with a pancake). Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. The crumb was perfect for this type of bread, with a fairly open crumb but too much so you can hold all those nice fillings in!
Hello again thefreshloaf community! I've done this a bit backwards, uploading my 1st bake on my second post. I was really excited about that five seed loaf! Anyways, this recipe came from Joshua Weissman on YouTube. His No Knead Beginner Sourdough Bread recipe was the least overwhelming for me. I even followed his schedule to help me out. From my results, I'd say it turned out great and was a huge success for my very first sourdough bake ever! I used, once again, my spouse's months old un-bleached organic white starter. We've just purchased some spelt flour, course rye, finely milled rye, banana flour, and chickpea flour. So excited to get baking! Levain: Dough: Sample Schedule (just to give you an idea:) 9am Start Levain 2:25 P.M. Begin Autolyse 3:00 P.M. Mix your dough, optionally use rhubaud method. Thank you to Trevor Jay Wilson who taught me that. 3:15 Bulk fermentation begins, performing 2 folds spaced 15 minutes apart, and then one last fold spaced by 30 minutes after the 2nd fold. Totaling at 3 folds. Allow dough to rest for remainder of bulk fermentation. 7:00 P.M. Preshape your loaves. 7:25 P.M. Shape your loaves and place them in their proofing baskets. Place them in plastic bags to prevent drying out, and proof them overnight in the fridge for 14-15 hours. (the next day)9:00 A.M. Preheat oven with your dutch ovens in their from cold, to get them super hot, for one hour. 10:00 A.M. Optionally score, and bake your loaves. Cool them on wire racks. Thanks for looking! :)
My all time favorite recipe - Sourdough Sugar Cookies! They are soft and fluffy and just so amazing. I hope you'll enjoy this recipe as well and give it a try. Truly worth the time! Thank you GeniusKitchen!! Recipe Here - Sourdough Sugar Cookies p.s. I highly recommend using Animal (Pork or Duck) Lard, Real (Grass Fed) Butter, or Coconut Oil as the fat. thanks for looking! :)
Pain au Levain with Whole Wheat Flour from Hamelman’s “Bread” October, 2018
I don't share my own baking often because I tend to stick to the same formulas. Also, admittedly, the level of baking exhibited on this site now far surpasses my skills. But a couple of weeks ago I experimented with simple dinner rolls that came out really good that I want to share. It's nothing fancy or complex, but it is really good. Good enough that I made them for our Thanksgiving (Canadian) dinner and they were a big hit. The first time I made these I discovered the battery in my scale had died, so I just winged it. I still haven't gotten a new battery, but the second time I took the time to measure and make a note of my ingredients (approximately). Sunflower Rolls Makes approximately 3 dozen rolls DRY INGREDIENTS 1 cup spelt flour 1 cup whole wheat flour 5 cups all purpose flour 1/3 cup brown sugar 1 tablespoon instant yeast 2 teaspoons salt 1 cup sunflower seeds WET INGREDIENTS 2 cups buttermilk, warmed in the microwave for two minutes to take the chill off 1 cup room temperature water 1/4 cup vegetable oil Combine the dry ingredients in one bowl, the wet in another, them combine them. Use a wooden spoon and your hands to get them well combined and shaggy, then let the dough rest for 5-10 minutes. If it is too dry to mix and not all the flour is hydrated, add more water a tablespoon at a time until the desired consistency is achieved. After the rest, knead the dough by hand or in a stand mixer for 5-10 minutes. Depending on how warm your kitchen is and how warm the buttermilk was, these can rise really quickly. I gave it about 1 hour for the bulk fermentation, then folded and degassed them and gave it one more hour. After that I cut and shaped them, then let the rolls rise for about 40 minutes before putting them into a 385 preheated oven.
For the past few weeks, I have had quite a few requests to make another olive loaf. So I took my Caramelized Onion with 4 Cheeses recipe and subbed out 3 types of Olives for the onions, feta for the 4 cheese blend and Kamut for the Selkirk wheat. I did adjust quantities on the fly to accommodate the ingredients I had on hand (Might as well use the entire jars of olives and the whole container of feta). 😊 Recipe Makes 3 loaves 500 g unbleached flour 200 g bread flour 250 g high extraction Kamut (Khorasan) flour (Mill 285 g of Kamut berries and sift the flour. Save the bran and, after weighing out 250 g for the main dough, any leftover sifted flour for the levain) 50 g buckwheat flour (Mill 50 g of buckwheat groats) 725 g water 144 g in total of green (Manzanilla 48 g), red (Kalamata 49 g) and black olives (47 g) 113 g crumbled Feta (I used a goat cheese feta) 30 g full fat plain yogurt 20 g Pink Himalayan salt 200 g 100% levain (explanation below) Plus high extraction whole wheat flour (local Brûlé Creek partially sifted flour) for levain The morning before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day:
With some simple calculations, you’ll realize that the 123 formula creates dough with a hydration of roughly 71.4%. This is totally fine if you’re working with white dough but not so much for someone like me, who prefers baking with higher percentages of whole grain. That’s why I made a porridge with batter-like consistency to bring the hydration up to 92% :) Purple & Red Rice Porridge Comte Sourdough For porridge: 39g      20.5%    Freshly milled germinated red rice flour 39g      20.5%    Freshly milled whole purple rice flour 117g     61.6%    Whey For dough: 190g       100% (3 parts out of 6)           Freshly milled whole spelt flour 127g          66.8% (2 parts out of 6)       Cold water 64g          33.7% (1 part out of 6)            Starter (half whole rye, half whole wheat) 9g           4.74% (3% of total flour)         Vital wheat gluten 5g          2.63% (1.67% of total flour)     Salt Add-ins: 60g        31.6% (20% of total flour)        Comte, cubed ___________ 300g  100%    Whole grain 276g    92%    Total hydration Make the porridge. Combine the rice flour and whey in a small pot. Heat it over medium heat while stirring until thickened. Optionally, sift out the bran of spelt flour and mix it into the porridge to soften. Roughly combine the porridge and all dough ingredients for the salt and leaven, autolyse for 20 minutes. Knead in the reserved ingredients then ferment for 15 minutes. Fold in the add-ins and ferment for 3 hours longer. Preshape the dough then let it rest for 15 minutes. Shape the dough and put in into a banneton. Retard for 12 hours. Preheat the oven at 250°C/482°F. Take the dough out of the fridge and let it warm up for 20 minutes at room temperature. Score and spritz the dough then bake at 250°C/482°F with steam for 15 minutes then without steam for 25 minutes more or until the internal temperature reaches a minimum of 208°F. Let cool for at least 2 hours before slicing. I always get killer crust: thin, crispy and super easy to cut into, when cheese is incorporated into dough. As the dough was baking, the cheese melted and its fats fried the crust. The oven spring was not impressive but not too bad either. This bread has an interesting texture. It’s soft and moist yet slightly chewy, resembling the texture of mochi. The altra crackly crust contrasts the springy crumb nicely. Not only is the purple crumb captivating, its highly aromatic flavour is also worth mentioning. Purple rice, red rice and spelt together contributes sweetness in this bread. There is very little sourness and no bitterness at all so even sourdough and whole grain haters would approve it. ________ Homemade whole wheat garlic chives dumplings Pressure cooked red wine beef ragu Pan grilled veggies with soft boiled eggs Garlic & thyme potatoes
50% Wholemeal Spelt with White Spelt and 50% Greek Yoghurt Whilst at the IGA store waiting for my script to be filled at the chemist i spotted a tub of greek yoghurt discounted to 99 cents and decided it would be nice to use in a bread. When i got home i worked out a formula for using wholemeal spelt and spelt flour and the yoghurt enough to make a 750g loaf. w/m spelt 220gspelt 220gsalt 8.8gbutter 8.8gyeast dried 8.8ggreek yoghurt 220gwater (but reqd more) 66g i mixed this dough by hand on the bench and it did require a good bit of extra water more than stated in the formula which was counting the yohgurt as liquid and with the water was 65% i added more than 20 g which would have bought the hydration up to 70%. mixing completed at 11.45 and it then proved for 2 hours 13.45 and as i was going to be giving my grand nephew a driving lesson in the mid afternoon decided to place the shaped loaf into a banneton right side up into a plastic bag and into the fridge. Upon my return it had proved quite nicely and was tipped into a cold dutch oven and then into the hot oven at 5,20 baking for the first 12 minutes with the lid on then the rest of the bake with it off.it is a lovely soft textured and flavoursome bread that should have great keeping qualities, if it last that long.
I was inspired by the flour combination and the beautiful loaves that Rich aka rgreenberg2000 made for the 123 community bake. A friend also reminded me of Kirsten's aka https://www.instagram.com/fullproofbaking/?hl=en method which she uses including lamination of the dough as well really pushing the bulk at lower temps 73Fish with a limited amount of folds. She also then skips pre-shape and goes straight to final shaping. I did not have any rye so used Emmer flour instead... 750g Strong White organic Marriages 50g Emmer (bag from my trip to Germany) 100g Caputo Semolina/Durum (from my trip to London and from Lina's Store as per Abe's tip!) 100g WW Organic Marriagse 800g water 200g leaven 100 hydration (90% strong White and 10% light rye) 20g salt Long 5 hours AL without salt whilst waiting for the leaven Mixed levain first and waited 30 min to add salt and used only Rubaud as after long AL the dough developed gluten nicely already. 1 S & F 30 min after adding salt Lamination 1.5 min after salt Then folds 60 min and 120 min after lamination and then left the dough alone for 1.5 hours...and by then it had doubled and was soo proofy... Dough after lamination... Dough before turning out on surface for shaping.. Final shaping only and this was a proofy monster.. I let it rest 15 min in banneton and then for 2 hours in the 4C is wine cooler for the very wobbly dough to cool down... Score straight in the middle trying to get that double ear! Loaf has a nice yellow hue which I think must be from the Semolina and also the crust seems to be particularly cripspy which I also noticed when I baked in the past with the Italian oo flour... Really happy and without a doubt will bake this again and try also with rye once I have more...Thank you Rich for the great idea of flour combination and finally cracked open my bags of Semolina! Oh and it tastes really lovely....!!!
It is easy to make one for yourself though using Lucy's variation of Peter Reinhart's whole grain rye method that takes 4 days and makes bread on day 5 with left over starter for storage - without any discard! Day 1- 30 g of whole grain rye and 25 g of water.  mix cover with plastic wrap and leave for 24 hour Day 2 add 30 g of WG rye and 25 g of water Mix and let sit for 24 hours covered in plastic Day 3 - divide in half.  Add 30 g of WG rye and 25 g of water to each half, stir and cover each with plastic Day 4 Add 30 g of WG Rye and 25 g of waterstir and let sit for 24 Day 5 Make levain for a loaf of bread with one half and divide the other one in half.  Feed one 60 g of flour and 40 g of water for storage in the fridge after it rises 25% and feed the other one 30 g of flour and 25 g of water to make a levain for bread 2 on the next day. Works every time without fail at 75 - 78 F. Happy SD baking
I chanced upon a long TFL post Chasing thin, crispy, not thick/tough dough A comment by Mariana regarding a 100% sponge method loaf caught my eye. I think Mariana made it in a bread machine, but the loft was incredible. I've been thinking of making a tin loaf for a while, so this was the perfect opportunity. It's a yeasted dough, but I did a couple of tweaks to add some extra flavour: addition of 10% Mockmilled whole wheat flour and addition of 13% leftover stiff levain I had in the fridge. Overall hydration was 64%, plus the butter. Initial mix Later Additions Process Thoughts Lance
Farina Bona is a unique flour produced in Cavigliano, a village in the Swiss canton of Ticino.  Cavigliano sits in the Valle Onsernone that runs east out of Locarno, the lakeside town from which the better known (to bread bakers) Valle Maggia runs north. This deeply yellow flour is milled from toasted but unpopped maize kernels and smells very much like what you would expect:  It has an unmistakable and intense popcorn fragrance. Farina bona production dates back centuries, was eventually abandoned but has recently been revived by some romantic slow foodies.  History and production notes can be gleaned from the official Farina Bona website or Wikipedia. How to toast corn without popping all the kernels, you ask?  With legendary Swiss precision, of course. Remove the pan from the fire after exactly one third of the kernels have popped (those Swiss can count really fast.  Who knew?).  Then [optional: fire up Netflix,] eat the popped kernels and mill only the Old Maids.  Mind you, this is the ‘revived’ procedure. From the official website, it is clear that the current revivalists are making their best guesses as to the actual but unrecorded protocol followed by the late, venerated Annunziata Terribilini (no, I’m not making up that name). As interesting as it would have been to visit Cavigliano when we were motoring in that direction this past summer, we were happy to find 250 gr bags of Farina Bona (along with a dazzling range of cheeses and chocolates, as well as fresh Pane Maggia) in the food hall of Manor, nearby Lugano’s big department store. Hot damn.The fragrance of the stuff is incredible.Did I say that already? Now, most of the recipes provided in the online Farina Bona cookbook are for sweets.  Sounds tempting and we'll get around to some eventually.  After all, Piedmontese maize biscuits ~ pasta di meliga ~ are seriously delicious and rival biscotti/cantucci/cantuccini for the cappuccino dunkability crown (pasta di meliga are available from Eataly and some Carluccio’s (UK)). So far we've just salted our precious Farina Bona into the weekly house miche our usual way:  At 3% of total flour, it coats and thereby de-clumps home-flaked porridge added at the second fold. We'd taken to using Alt Altus and/or powdered dehydrated sweet corn for that purpose this summer (in combination, an uncanny approximation of Farina bona), but popcorn is one of those smells and tastes that evokes such universally happy associations.  So why not. Farina bona would need to be closer to 10% of total flour to take center-stage and give the miche an assertively corny character. But we’re after some light maize counterpoint here, not a Popcorn Requiem Mass.  At 3%, it's a largely subliminal hint barely peeking above the radar, but a happy hint is better than no hint at all. There’s an outside chance that Eataly sells Farina Bona in their stores (they don’t online*).  It's just the kind of unique regional product they'd promote. I keep forgetting to forage for it there.  But then again, Italy has far too many worthy regional culinary delights competing for precious Eataly shelf space.  More importantly, Cavigliano’s being culturally but not politically Italian is almost certainly a deal-breaker. Still, if you're lucky enough to have an Eataly nearby, take a look.  And a sniff. Happy Baking, Tom ___________________ * If you Google(Shopping) <Farina bona>, you get a page of Farina bona fan T-shirts.  I don’t know where that’s coming from. Maybe those romantic slow foodies have hired a PR firm.
Good evening, my name is Filippo and I write from a beautiful city called Bergamo, located in northern Italy. I worked for a few years as a pizza chef in Italy and six months in Greece. From one year I found out the bread with sourdough, and seems that in Italy it is still a recent practice. There are few realities willing to teach. My girlfriend and I would like to open a micro bakery near our house and we are looking for someone to teach a small business. Produce 1 kg of bread is different to produce 50 kg We would like to make bread with long fementations (using the fridge) with sourdough and organic flours. At the moment I have a little experience with tests done at home (after reading Tartine bread) by kneading by hand and cooking in a "Lodge" cast-iron (waiting to buy a mixer and the Rofco b40 oven) if anyone is interested and want to help us we will be honored. We are willing to leave for all of Europe (Spain, England, Ireland, France, Germany Etc ..) Thank you Filippo and Linda
Flavorful, complex Boule 324 g  kefir whey 325 g all purpose flour 150 g whole wheat flour 25 g whole-grain rye 1/2 tsp Instant yeast 10 g sea salt 6:00 pm. mix all the ingredients by hand or in a mixer several hours to prove 10 PM, shaping into tight boule, place seam side up in well floured cloth lined basket. Refrigerate within larger plastic bag Next morning Preheat cast iron skillet and cast iron loaf pan (For steaming) in 475 oven Turn over refrigerated boule, dust with more flour and score design Carefully place scored Boule in hot skillet and add boiling water into cast iron loaf pan. Lower heat to 450° after five minutes cover with pot cover. bake 20 minutes remove cover. Lower temperature to 425  and continue breaking 10 more minutes.
I make my baking as easy as possible - I want bread, not the experience of making bread. I keep a sourdough starter, and I feed it about 30 grams of whole wheat flour and 20 grams of water, about every other day, so it is always ready, always very active, and always about the hydration of my dough - one less thing to worry about. On a baking day,  I start about 5:30 am by  grinding ~480 grams of hard red wheat and 20 grams of rye malt through the stone burr grain mill 4 times, once coarse, once medium, once fine, and once fine as possible. (Some grain mills are not designed to re-grind meal/flour). This takes less then 10 minutes. I put the fresh flour in a big mixing bowl, (with a lid, I sometimes just use a stock pot), add ~5 grams of instant yeast, about 50 grams  of sough dough starter (often half my starter),  about 666 grams of room temp water,  mix with a wooden spoon,  put the lid on it, and let it ferment at  room temp for ~6 hours. We have wet seasons and dry seasons, so the moisture content of my wheat varies by 5% through the year.  At this stage, I do not worry about hydration.  This mix ferments fairly  rapidly. I check on it and give it a stir a couple of times during the morning. After lunch, (1:00 pm) I stir in by handfuls 500 grams of good bread flour and 20 grams of salt,  and I let it sit covered for most of an hour.  In the next hour, I give the dough several stretch and folds, and I adjust hydration either by adding water or flour.   About 2:30 pm the dough gets pre-shaped, bench rested, the loaf/loaves formed, and placed in a proofing basket(s), covered with shower cap(s), and allowed to rise in a warm place for a couple of hours. About 4:30, it gets put on the hearthstone in a 450 F oven.  Oven temperature is reduced during baking because we do not like very dark crusts. Thus, we have fresh bread for dinner at 6 pm. When I am baking for friends that grew up  with "black bread", I  use more, or even all, whole wheat. The bread should fit the rest of the menu.
I was checking out my stash of grains and realized that I have a lot of Kamut. So I decided to do a repeat of a loaf that I did about a year ago. I did make a few changes to include things that I have learned over the past year and also decided to add some honey. And.... I forgot to add my usual yogurt. I didn’t feel up to par for some reason so I’ll consider myself lucky that the rest of the dough seemed to come nicely together. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Sprouts 100 g Kamut berries Soaker 50 g flax seeds 100 g Kamut flakes 300 g boiling water Dough 700 g unbleached flour 250 g high extraction Kamut flour (mill and sift 285 g of Kamut berries) 50 g high extraction rye flour (mill and sift 60 g of rye berries) 570 g water + 30 g 60 g honey 22 g pink Himalayan salt 200 g 100% hydration 4 stage levain (procedure in recipe) Extra whole grain wheat or/and partially sifted whole grain flour for levain Three days before: Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Dough day: Baking Day: I was very happy when I lifted the lids and saw that these loaves had sprung nicely! They sure smell good!
My brother asked me if I had any extra bread for his mother-in-law but all of my Kamut 3 Ways with Honey were spoken for. I had some left over levain after I mixed up my other dough so I threw this recipe together. Unfortunately, I didn’t have time to mill fresh flour, however, I did use flour from our local Brule Creek mill so it wasn’t all commercial flour. By the way, I am not sure if this qualifies for a 1-2-3 dough but I used that as my starting point. Recipe Makes two large loaves Soaker 200 g of large flake oats 200 g boiling water Main dough 250 g of 100% 4 stage levain 500 g of water 250 g partially sifted wholewheat flour (Brule Creek) 500 g unbleached flour 50 g honey 17 g Pink Himalayan salt 40 g plain yogurt Soaker Dough Baking
I missed baking last week due to life getting in the way, so was happy to get some time this weekend to make friends again with "Woody" (yes, my starter has a name) and make a fresh batch of my usual weekly sourdough.  This week, I dropped the rye to let the semolina shine through a little more......next time, I think I will drop the WW (except for what's in the starter) and up the semolina appropriately. 1000g AP (KA) 100g WW (KA) 100g Semolina (Bob's) 250g Starter (100% hydration, fed w/WW) 803g Water 26g Salt I did everything up to the final fridge proof in one day, starting the first starter wake-up refresh at 9a (10:10:10).  Followed this with 30:30:30 and 90:95:95.  I wanted to try using the starter a little earlier this time, so only let it rise about 70%, then proceeded with my mix.  All of the flour, water and starter got mixed up, and then rested for 30 minutes.  Pinched in the salt, and did about 25 stretch/folds, then rested 30 minutes.  Another two series of s/f on the half hour, trying to be much more gentle with the last one than I usually am.  After this, I let it bulk proof at 75F which took about 2 hours.  Shaped (had a devil of a time for some reason....STICKY!!!), then into lined bannetons to proof for an hour at 75F, then off to the fridge for the night.  In the morning, baked covered at 475F for 20 minutes, then uncovered for 25 minutes. I am very pleased with the results of this loaf across the board.  Good oven spring and bloom, crazy blisters, crispy crust, and a bit more open crumb than I usually get.  Oh, and it tastes damn fine, too!! :)  Some pics......
I haven't baked baguettes in ages. I'm not sure why. I baked a few today, including an epi de blé. It was very yummy with a bowl of bean and farro soup for lunch today. The obligatory crumb photo. This is one piece of the epi. Bean-Farro soup. I made this up for my vegetarian granddaughters. It was so good, I wrote down the recipe and have made it many times since. I'm baking more sourdough multi-grain loaves tomorrow. Happy baking! David
The smell of fresh bread in the air is so good in the morning. This one was baked at 4:30 am for breakfast. The recipe is as follows: 65 g levain @ 100% hydration 288 g flour mix (175 g bread flour, 93 g whole wheat, 20 g rye) 20 g seeds (chia + quinoa) scalded with 25 g boiling water 183 g water for mixing 15 g water (for double hydration) 4.5 g salt Splash of honey The levain came from two starters, one made using 80% bread flour + 20% whole wheat, and the other made with 100% whole wheat. First dissolved levain in the mixing water, added all flours and shortly mixed manually. Waited 20 minutes and mixed salt, kneading it in for about 1 min. Waited another 20 min to mix the scalded seeds, kneading again for about 1 min to mix the seeds in. After 30 min added the water for the double hydration and kneaded another 1 min or so. Applied 2 sets of stretch and folds in the bow, bulk fermented for about 4 hours in the oven with lights on. Shaped and placed it in the fridge for about 4 hours until it was baked straight from the fridge for 35 min in 220 C dutch oven with lid on + 2 min with lid off. Nice taste, moist crumb and great crust consistence. It took less than 12 hours between mixing and baking. The flavor has not been compromised by a quick bake like this one.
I've made some changes to my basic sourdough recipe - the first loaves I made a couple of weeks ago had a shorter, room-temp bulk fermentation, all AP flour, and the towels the dough rose in were dusted with AP. This time, I used 500 g bread flour to 200 g AP flour, a 16-hr cold bulk fermentation, and made the switch to rice flour for my proofing towels/bowls. The crust is everything I wanted - deep color, fully blistered, and crackly even 24 hours post-bake. I think I liked the texture of the crumb more with AP flour though, particularly when it comes to soaking up butters and oils. Next time I think I'll keep the fermentation and rice floured towels, and ease back to a majority AP flour dough. I think that might get me closer to where I want to be, but in the meantime, progress!
after last s&f  Recent bakes by Kat and rgreenberg2000 looked so good I had to give this bread a try.  No emmer though and only 1 small loaf. 6:45 am Levain mixed up (a small amount of rye in this)and left at room temperature rising to 25° c 9:15 am Autolyse 203 g bread flour + 14 g rye + 27 g durum + 27 g wholewheat + 216 g water 13:00 mix final dough - add 54 g levain followed by 100 SLAFs. Add 4 g salt stretch and fold then 140 SLAFS. 13:45 pm Tried to do coil folds, very sticky and wet (guess who forgot to hold back some water!) so ended up doing about 12 stretch and folds. Rested a couple of minutes then did my version of laminating.  After 60 & 120 minutes I completed about 10 S & F. Despite the SLAFs, lamination and stretch and folds this dough did not appear very strong.  2 1/4 hours dough had risen about 80% so I shaped, placed in banneton and retarded overnight. Baked at 230°c convection on DO 15 minutes lid on, 15 minutes lid off.  No ear to speak off but crumb is very nice Bread 2 was Maurizio’s  COuntry loaf with long autolyse and  low% levain. 6:45 am levain mixed 7.5 g refreshed starter + 15 g wholewheat + 15 g bread flour + 30 g water @ 85°F and left on bench to do its thing. 09:30 am Autolyse 28 g wholewheat + 251 g bread flour + 223 g water 12:45 pm Add 42 g levain followed by 100 SLAFs. 6 g salt added and another 130 SLAFs completed.  this was followed at 30 minute intervals by 3 x 6 s&f. Dough left until about 80% increased, 18:25 pm preshape and rest for 30 minutes, shape and retard over night. Baked at same time as first loaf in a second DO. this was very similar to Kat’s loaf and I found both quite wet, slack doughs. a bit disappointed with appearance altho actual was darker than it looks here. Crumb ok, thats alright after all! I ended up with some refreshed starter left over - can’t throw that away - how much is left? 70 g? ok 123 coming up. Inspiration - recent bakes using whatever is around - so  what flour is around? ok lots of bits 12:00 noon autolyse 143 g bread flour + 36 g spelt + 6 g kamut + 8 g durum + 17 g rye + 210 g water 13:15 pm Mix final dough.  Add 70 g levain + 6 g yoghurt (had a bit of that too) and an additional 8 g water.  after 100 SLAFs added 3.8 g salt thenc ompleted the mix with another 100 SLAFs.   Much nicer dough than the other two! 3 sets of coil folds every 30 minutes. After an hour the dough had risen about 75% so it was preshaped at 4:35 pm and shaped into a. oule at 5 pm.  Added some oat bran to teatowell and retarded in soup bowl overnight in fridge. Baked in DO. it seemed to deflate a bit when scored, even though it looked good before. Crumb shot Happy baking all Leslie
What do you do when given some interesting flour to play with? well you have to go home and try it straight away! i made a White loaf with 10% addition of Millet Flour. I required enough dough to fill a banneton 750g bakers flour 90% 393gmillet flour 10% 42gsalt 2% 9glard 2% 9gmalt 2% 9gyeast (dry) 2% 9gwater 70% 295g This was quite a quick acting dough and when shaped i decided to make the loaf placed upside down in a banneton to prove but like the old uprights that can be pulled apart quite easily , look a bit like siamese twins. The Aroma is quite divine if the taste is half as good i will be well pleased!
This bread is based on Chad Robertson's Tartine 3 brown rice porridge bread.  As Robertson says, "...combine well-cooked whole grain rice with a highly hydrated whole wheat dough and let the loaves fully ferment with natural leaven to make the nutrients contained within the finished bread readily available for digestion."  I opted to use organic black rice for its rich nutritional value and cut back on the total amount added to the dough to keep the bread a bit lighter; I also added a small amount of oat porridge for complimentary taste and texture.  The dough was mixed with 200g fresh milled, high extraction organic rye/Marquis wheat flour and 800g organic all purpose white flour autolysed with 750g filtered water for 1 hour; then 15g sea salt, 250g young levain was mixed/50 stretch and folds. After the second of four series of stretch/folds done every 30 minutes, 350g black rice porridge and 50g oat porridge was added. Bulk fermentation was 4 hours at room temperature; then pre-shaped and 1/2 hour rest before final shaping and cold-proofing for 10 hours. Baked covered for 25 minutes at 500 F; 10 minutes at 450 F and then uncovered for 20 minutes at 450 F.  The bread is very soft, chewy with a slight purple colour and a nice nutty, mellow flavour; sesame seeds and the sifted bran coating added an extra bit of flavour to the crust.
This week’s round of RWC SD.  Changes for this one were: Dropped WW addition, increased Semolina Reduced hydration to 67% (was going to make baguettes, but didn’t) Increased 75F proof to 2 hours before overnight Did my usual mix, rest, pinch, stretch/fold, rest, s/f, rest, s/f rest, bulk, etc. The dough was a bit stickier than I expected with the reduced hydration, but I also switched to Gold Medal AP since the store was out of KA…..it seems to behave a bit differently.  Got everything shaped up ok, and baked up after a cold nap. Since we talked a bit about slashing and ears and such in my last blog entry, I took a picture of my slash on this one.  I guess my estimate of only 1/4” slash as my standard was a bit off, I’d say this is closer to 1/2” (and, I have to say I REALLY like the looks of the bubbles you can see in the slash line…..or “ditch” if you like Dan’s parlance!): Uncovered for last 25 minutes: Out of the oven to cool: Not quite the same bloom as the last one, but I think I didn’t underproof it quite as much, so that makes some sense.  Also, this batch sized ended up smaller than usual since I was originally planning to make baguettes and had changed my formula weights for that…..but ended up making two batards instead. Haven’t cut into either loaf yet, so don’t know how the crumb turned out, but it smells fantastic!  I’ll post up a crumb shot later. Rich
I called into South Metro Tafe Beaconsfield yesterday to make a booking for lunch at Quinlan's Training Restaurant for next week and was informed that the facility will be closing for good at the end of this term which is only 5 weeks away. I was given the opportunity to endulge myself and spend this morning with a number of Commercial Cookery students in the training restaurants bakery. Under the circumstances i thought it wise to grab the chance while i could.As i did a test run with the 10% Millet bread posted here just yesterday i opted to do that but a much larger dough 5Kg of flour and using the big Hobart mixer. this was followed by a fruit dough 5Kg making Cinnamon Scrolls just like we used to make for the Cancer Councils fund raising Australia's biggest morning tea.All four students were very attentive and were picking up their hand skills very quickly.i will be back next week but seated in the restaurant see the menu.
If you have been following my blog posts you know by now that I love a good porridge bread.  This one is no exception. The addition of the coffee flavored maple syrup to the porridge and main dough added a nice slightly sweet undertone.  You don't really taste the coffee but overall combined with the rice this one is a keeper. The crumb came out perfect; moist, soft and open.  This is one that is good enough to eat by itself.  I finished off the whole loaf using it for sandwiches and gave one away to a few of my dog park friends. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, rice, maple syrup and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 550 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Eggplant moong dal (skinned mung bean) curry, rava upma (semolina pilaf) and spiced okra
I got a request for a “7-grain with Bulgur” that I apparently made a while ago. The only thing I could figure out was that it had to be Hamelman’s 5 grain Levain that I had made with Bulgur. So here is a 7 different flours with seeds and grains version not counting the AP flour. Makes 3 loaves Liquid Levain build 272 g flour 343 g Water 55 g Starter (if kept in the fridge, fed a few times prior to using in the Levain) Soaker 100 g bulgur 100 g Flaxseeds 76 g Sunflower seeds 85 g old fashioned oats (large flake) 484 g Water, boiling 6 g Salt Dough 533 g Unbleached flour 15 g Vital Wheat Gluten 40 g high extraction Selkirk wheat flour 40 g high extraction Red Fife flour 40 g high extraction Spelt flour 40 g high extraction Kamut flour 40 g high extraction Einkorn flour 40 g high extraction Rye flour 40 g Partially Sifted Brûlé Creek flour 303 g Water + 50 g + 21g 30 g yogurt 21 g Pink Himalayan Salt All of the Soaker 650 g Levain A day or so before: The night before: Making the dough: Baking The daughter came home from her midnight shift at the hospital and persuaded me to cut into one of the warm loaves. Warm bread with cold butter from the local dairy, can’t get any better than that!
Been a little while since I made these - getting better at keeping them down in the mold - half this batch stayed down thr other half popped up. No idea why !
Some of you might have seen a post recently by user/morb1lee (http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/57650/bulk-grain-free-samples) offering samples of his wheat grain. This 50% whole wheat using Lee's grain is the result.  I chose this plain recipe to showcase the grain, and am quite please with the results.  I ground the grain, sifted, and used the bran for the levain.  I highly recommend this process (which I owe to dabrownman), as it softens the bran, making the dough silky smooth, softens the bran so as not to sever the gluten strands, and making the whole grain more digestible.  The finished bread is as soft as sandwich bread. The final rise was a 24 hour cold retard.
There really was enough bread in the freezer for most of a week, but I had an irresistible urge to bake bread, and I had promised to make a 75% whole wheat sourdough with home-milled flour, and last week's SJSD baguettes were so good and so gone ... 🤪 75% Whole Wheat Levain from FWSY, made with MockMilled whole wheat (and some rye) The 75% Whole Wheat Levain's crumb San Joaquin Sourdough Baguettes And, last but not least, a Walnut-Fig Levain. It's good. It's the favorite of many of those with whom I share my breads. Walnut-Fig Levain crumb Walnut-Fig  levain with Point Reyes Blue Cheese. Delicious! I feel better now. 😁 Happy baking! David
I thought I would more seriously document my bread-making on this site, so I have a history that I and others can learn from. Today I baked a formula that dmsnyder posted in August http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/57042/multigrain-sourdough-bread-made-homemilled-flours-august-8-2018 using using the technique that is used in Myhrvold’s bread encyclopedia. I did the autolyse step with all but the salt (including the leaving that I made the previous day), and then I machine mixed the ingredients until medium gluten development.  I then did 2 folds over  2 1/2 hours, and then pretty much followed David’s formula. I baked the loaves in the cast iron pot, covered for 45 minutes and then uncovered for an additional 10. For the first loaf I had set my oven to 500, reducing it to 470 when the bread went into the oven; for the second, I just left the oven at 470 the whole time. I think I prefer the second one. i feel that this was a great success. It did not rise very high, but after all it is 40% whole grain. The taste and texture was really nice. I may play with this formula some time adding seeds and/or dried fruit some time. It is a really nice formula. Thank you, David. My scoring could use some improvement (not as lovely as David’s), but the taste makes up for it, I feel!
I've had a good few discussions lately about domestic oven steaming, notably with DanAyo and Doc.Dough. I've tried various in-oven solutions over the last year or two with good, but not great results. It was also getting to the point where it was taking longer to set the oven up than it was to do the actual baking! I became convinced that the best way forward was to generate steam externally and introduce it into the oven. This blog post gives some details of the practicalities of how I achieved this. I decided that the simplest steam generator was going to be a pressure cooker, but there are other options, eg a steam wallpaper stripper! So, as luck would have it, I found a nice compact stainless pressure cooker preowned at a good price. Originally sold by Lidl, I believe. I drilled a hole in the lid with a hole saw and fitted a 1/4 bsp ball valve, sealed in with a ptfe washer. I added a 1/2 bsp hose fitting and this end of things was ready to go. For the oven, the only way in was from the side and through the adjacent kitchen cabinet - fortunately it's all hidden away! So I drilled a hole in the oven wall with the same hole saw and fitted a threaded 1/4 bulkhead fitting with ptfe washer. I needed a bigger hole in the oven cladding to get access from the outside. Then a bit of thinwall stainless tubing, plus some more fittings and a bit of silver soldering got the oven end of things finished. I fitted some silicone tubing round the stainless pipe, held in place with Kapton tape, to ensure the wood doesn't get burnt. The pipe from the pressure cooker to the oven is an old shower hose - the good ones are silicone tubing with a chrome plated brass outer, so just the job. So, all done and ready to go! The trial run in a cold oven was promising, except the oven started to go rusty! I used the steamer for the first time this morning and am well pleased with the results so far. I got the pressure cooker up to pressure - about 10psi, I think. Then put the loaves in, opened the steam up full, burner up full. The pressure soon dropped to zero, but i think the initial surge is useful. I steamed for 10 mins and then knocked it off and briefly vented the oven. Early days, but I'm pleased with the look of the loaves. There's more work to do as the crust is slightly tough and not as crisp as I hoped - perhaps I need to reduce the steam time a bit? One interesting thing I noticed is that weight loss of the loaves was reduced. Any way, here's a few photos of the build: Lance
and baked another Semolina durum loaf, WW loaf with white...based on 1:4:5 ratio and it works so well..... I think I try next time a version with Khorasan and Durum....what an autumn colour feast that will be! Although inoculation was 20% I pushed the bulk at a temp of 74F to 6 hours and shaping was tricky.....no pre-shape and straight into the basket for 15 min ambient proofing and then into fridge overnight... Great colour and flavour... I also decided to bake similar formula with the semolina durum and WW but added Chia seeds...I followed Danni's advice and roasted them and then just added them to the mix for AL...I didn't add any additional water for the seeds either and dough felt quite stiff considering it was a 1:4:5.... Trying a Rubaud with 4kg of dough was a 'wrestle' and ended up with slap and folds...arms and hand aching!! Will be fun to bake tomorrow... Happy 1st November....Kat
Been keeping a low profile around here, minding my own business - mostly. I finally got around to baking this bread after promising Lechem (Abe) that I would.  My grain selection was bulgur, steel cut oats and flax & sunflower seeds.  Indeed, all the crowing around TFL for this bread is well deserved and it is quite delicious. Mixing by hand proved to be a bit of a bear, but French Fold mix it I did.  Left out the IDY.  Two letter folds at 40 & 80 and into retard.  The seam was a bit hard to ID as I was placing it onto the couche, and the two baguettes had a small amount of exposed seam which split on the side of each.  Grr, but it happens once in a while.  Twice in one bake is another thing. Another bread where there is scant evidence of having been done in baguette form, so you know that it was destined to be mine to do so. Being a heavy dough I wasn't disappointed in the amount of grigne on the breads, but I was hoping for a little more.  Next time I'll add some IDY and up the hydration a little. Abe visits a friend of his in Miami Beach, maybe annually, and last year we got together for the day, driving around and exposing him to a mini-tour of some of the Latin culture there.  Argentine cafe for breakfast, Cuban sandwiches and cubano coffees for lunch and Peruvian seafood for dinner.  With a few stops elsewhere in between. This year, in fear of what to do, I came up with a plan which met with Abe's satisfaction.  Lunch at the Granier Bakery in Sunny Isles Beach where, for no other reason to go there, it was where Abel Sierra put in time with his friend last summer.  Then the “scenic” back way drive from there to my apartment in Ft. Lauderdale where we did two bakes together. I had prepared both a Vermont SD, which was still retarded in bulk, and an already couched and ready for the oven semolina with raisins, pine nuts and fennel seeds. Afterwards a short walk for a dinner of pizza and beer, and then we traveled back down to Miami.  The destination being the fairly new Miami wholesale only bakery of the Sullivan Street Bakery in NY.  If the bakery doesn’t sound familiar to you then perhaps the owner will.  Jim Lahey, he being the baker who popularized the no-knead bread. It is a pretty large scale operation and I checked with the head baker there to ensure that our visit was welcomed.  We arrived close to 11 PM, in time to see both some shaping and some baking in their humongous ovens.  Plenty of time for conversational interaction, and they couldn’t have been more accommodating, ensuring that we each left with a bread of our choice.  All in all, an exceptional and fun outing. How am I going to top that next year?  Hmm.
I am really loving adding rice to my doughs and this bake was no exception. I wanted some nice soft rolls especially so I could freeze some of them to have for burgers and sandwiches as needed I added mashed potatoes  with the skins on, some cottage cheese and a little maple syrup for a bit of sweetness. When I was ready to bake them I used an egg wash and sprinkled black sesame seeds, garlic sesame seeds and smoked Gouda cheese on some of the rolls. All I can say is these were not only nice and soft but full of flavor and perfect for any use. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours and cooked rice together in your mixer or by hand along with the water, until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 30 minutes or longer.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), and the rest of the ingredients and mix for 4 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours (If you use a proofer set to 78 degrees you can finish in about 1.5 hours). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1  hour.  Remove the dough and shape into rolls.   Cover with moist tea towels or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 500 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 435 degrees.  Bake for approximately 20-25 minutes until the rolls are nice and brown. Take the rolls out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before eating.  It's hard to resist splitting one of these open and spreading some butter and indulging :).
After a visit to Linas Stores in London yesterday my son kept saying that I really must try to bake Focaccia bread... so I was inspired by a formula in Tartine1 where Chad Robertson basically describes that they grabbed a proofed loaf and added in his case sliced potato to the dough and it turned into a focaccia.... So, as I had too much starter this morning I made a quick basic white 1:4:5 dough and let the bulk go quite far and proofy...then just poured it into an oiled baking tin and let it proof for an hour until it looked like this... That finger poking thing was sooooo much fun and added olive oil and some tomatoes and a bit of parmesan cheese.....I was not allowed to add peppers... Baked for 20 min and done... This was surprisingly quick and easy and just have 2 pieces left for a packed lunch tomorrow...
So, I made "Paulina Abascal's pan de muerto" recipe (https://laroussecocina.mx/receta/pan-de-muerto/ is spanish, but it is easy with google translate I think). Here are the results: I wanted to post my results with it for reference for anybody who wishes to make this recipe. I did everything as stated except that i prinkled sugar before baking rather than after as i didn't wanted to pour melted butter at the end in order to sprinkle sugar later. I was feeling lazy about that.For my personal preference I think that it was lacking sugar, and instead of 100 g of sugar i would add between 120 and 150 (I require more experimentation). Also I like it a bit more soft so I would also add more butter and eggs. There is also the serious eats take on the recipe (here: https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2011/10/dulces-pan-de-muerto-day-of-the-dead-recipe.html#comments-40056). In it they add an egg yolk more reduce the butter and flour evenly (1/2 cup less flour, but still 20% butter (with bakers percentage)), and they leave the rest ingredientes as is. Maybe we have similar preferences, so I will have to try their modification in order to determine the differences to achieve a more moist result. All in all, it was fun and tasty, but It could be better. Here is a shot of it rising in the oven, because it looks pretty: I will try again the recipe without the shape given that I will be off season, but it is insane to experiment once each year. I don't know when though.
It is science, but no rockets. Unless, of course, you haven't gotten off the ground. Then everyone who has looks like they're flying rockets. I've been making bread since forever. I actually taught the Egyptians the process ;-) No, really, I've been either watching my mother or making bread myself on and off for at least 60 years. I've been making sourdough for twenty-ish years. The rewarding and fulfilling part of this is that I get to eat really good bread all the time. In addition to that, all of my friends think I'm the bread king. The accolades are nice but at the end of the day it's my own satisfaction that matters. After all these years I can now create completely new formulas (formulae?) like my latest coconut bread made for a friend, or go sideways with an old formula to try something new. So why do I sound so braggadocious? Because this post is my promise to those who are just starting, or restarting, or just struggling for what ever reason, you can do this. Remember, it doesn't require rockets. If you just keep trying, and by that I mean you need to make bread on a regular and consistent schedule, it will come. After years of making yeasted bread successfully I wanted to make that legendary and mystical sourdough stuff. So I did my research, long before this great site appeared, so in some ways it should now be easier, and gave up making a scratch starter when I found a source for a free one that had a good reputation, got said starter, and started making bread. Of COURSE the beginning attempts were horrific. It's a different world working with flour and acids. I made my formula, made adjustments, made it again, twice a week for 4 - 6 months before it got good. So there's nothing to boast about concerning my learning speed. If it was edible, I ate it. If it was more than I could eat I gave it away, and that's a key part of this process for me. And if it wasn't edible I chucked it. Eventually I got to the point where even my screwups made good bread. Maybe not great bread but better than that stuff in the stores. Why is it important to give bread away? Tonight I'm borrowing a free dump-trailer from a friend I give bread to, to haul free soil given to me by a friend I give bread to, to increase the value of my property. I haven't even started to calculate how much value is involved in this little transaction, but it's more than the cost of a few loaves of bread. Anyway, this last weekend I made my signature sourdough. I almost always make two batches of two loaves. I had prepared two portions of starter and when I began assembling the doughs, I discovered I had too little of white bread flour. So rather than throwing one starter out, I made a half-and-half white/wheat. I know wheat takes more moisture than white so I adjusted the hydration level on the fly from 75% to 79% and followed my standard process. After overnight cold retardation, I let it rise to room temp, portioned and baked. The picture above is the whole wheat result. I'm not a photographer, the picture was just taken with my phone, but it turned out better than the intended turned out. The example below is the original formula. It's a little under developed but it will eat just fine. I'm not entering it in any contest. I think the whole wheat loaves are a little under developed too. Here's that crumb: Personally, I don't like a crumb that is so open you can't make a sandwich to take to work because everything inside will fall out, but I like it a little more open than this. I love making bread, or baking in general, and love eating the products of my efforts even more. I also love teaching people how to do it. That's the reason for this post: to encourage you stugglers. If you persist in your efforts, post your results, give your bread away so you can make more, study and learn, eventually it will be easy and even your 'failures' will delight you and your friends. Occasionally you might post some good looking images of what your pain and suffering taught you how to make. It won't take 60 years either. One other encouragement: it's not rocket science and it's not religion. You don't have to believe everything you read. I almost never throw away starter. I feed mine once a week or two. I can hear the masses inhaling, aghast. Sometimes I go too long and have to resurrect it after three months of inactivity. It takes a whole day. You don't have to make only sourdough. A really superb yeasted bread is satisfying too. When I don't have two days to make SD, I make WW sandwich bread. It takes 4 hours. The only down side to all of this is I can't eat store-bought bread anymore. So if I have time I make SD, if I have less time I make WW. If I have no time, I go without. And that sucks.
I knew these would likely over-proof, but I pushed it anyway. Hamelman multigrain - 50% five whole grain, sifted with a bran levain, of course (kamut, red and white wheat, emmer, last of the sprouted spelt), with honey, a few tbs of my faux red rye malt, and a soaker containing whatever was lying around:  the last of the dried Borodinsky from last winter, teff, chia, and sunflower seeds.  I added lots of extra water during the mix.  It's all relative when working with whole grains and a soaker, but I'd be surprised if this was under 85% hydration. The dough was oh so slack at first, but tightened nicely with a few folds every half hour.  I fermented at 80 F for the first hour or so then lowered to 76, which didn't cool it down much.  I should have shortened the bulk but didn’t, and it got 2.5 hours before shaping.  Shaping went well, but I knew what was coming.  When I checked the cold-proofing loaves before bed they were already quite inflated.  Not surprisingly they didn’t get good lift during the bake.  But the results are good anyway, and from the crumb you'd hardly know what a knucklehead I am.  In fact, one person on the ferry said it was her favorite of my breads so far.  Go know. Eye-level shot tells the story - over-proofed loaves that spread.
Have a bright week!
Hello Everyone Following some irregular posting, here is a bake where I am using a bit durum. You can't even see it in the final bake, but hey it is a good start. Levain 20 g starter (10 g from each starter I have been keeping) 50 g white flour 50 g water Dough All levain 160 g white 20 g semolina 70 g whole wheat 157 g water 4 g salt Process Dissolve the levain in water, add all flour and mix into a shaggy mass. Wait 30 min and add salt, knead a bit (<1 min). Wait for another 30 min and add another 10 g water and knead to incorporate. Apply 3 stretches and folds every 30 min, and bulk ferment for another hour. In total, the bulk fermentation was about 4 hours in the oven with lights on. Shape and retard in the fridge for 4.5 hours. Baked in a 230 C oven starting with a cold pot, 42 min with lid on + 10 min with lid off. I have not scored, so I tried to get a more rustic look like Danni's. And success! Crumb is moist, meshed, and soft with a slight tang but nothing overwhelming. I have been baking bread that takes less than 10 hours from mix to bake and the results have been gratifying without sacrificing any flavor (at least to my tasting buds).
I had some leftover purple sweet potatoes and caramelized onions so threw this bread together.  I thought the cranberries would make a nice addition to the flavor profile along with the nice nutty fresh milled spelt flour. I gave a loaf to my good friend who happens to be a professional photographer at Wes Steinberg Studios.  He did me a favor and did some head-shots for my LinkedIn profile which came out excellent (or at least as good as the subject matter would allow :)).  I asked him to shoot some photos of the bread as well and I added some of them in this post.  I think you can easily tell which ones he did and I did using my Iphone. Well, I guess the bread tasted pretty good since he called me up the next day and asked me to bake 3 more loaves for Turkey Day! The crumb was nice and moist from the yogurt, sweet potatoes and onions and the loaf was perfect for grilled cheese sandwiches or turkey. Formula Note: Water content of the Sweet Potatoes is approximately 59 grams which is not reflected in the overall hydration but was taken into account when formulating the amount of water to use. Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours and 85% or so, of the water together in your mixer or by hand until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 30 minutes to 1 hour.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), olive oil, potatoes, yogurt, and the rest of the water and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Now add the cranberries and onions and mix until incorporated about 25 seconds or so.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 1.5 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (If you have a proofer you can set it to 80 degrees and follow above steps but you should be finished in 1 hour). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 hour (Spelt tends to proof very quickly, so if you don't use Spelt I would leave the dough out for 1.5 to 2 hours).    Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take about 1 hour depending on your room temperature (if not using Spelt it will take 1.5 to 2 hours).  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 1 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Loved the flour! I fold the dough ove\ I made three 1-2-3 loaves . Each had 100 g of your wheat along with home milled  durum, spelt and my local mill provides my unbleached flour. I used 3 different levain. #1 was my 10 yr old SD starter fed with unbleached  ,#2 was my 7 yr old Apple YW fed with unbleached and #3 was my SD starter fed with semolina. Amazing rising power with almost no hands on time. Process for each bread:  I place all the salt in a thin area and spray well on top of the dough as it rests.  It is  left to rest for 1-2 hours. I then pat the dough to a 1/2" thickness  with sprays of additional water on the countertop and the dough surface. I fold the dough over and over left to right like strudel and then end to end. Rest for one hour. Repeat patting and fold once more. Leave till puffy.. only took 2 hrs.in the oven with a light on. I don’t shape so much as I pull in the edges and pinch lightly and retard pinched side down. My oven is broken so I have to be careful of temps . It was supposed to be fixed today but that didn’t happen! I am so pleased with the fragrance of the breads and the addition of Lee's  flour made the dough a pleasure to work with. The first crumb shot is the Semolina fed SD levain. Flavor is VERY wheat and only a tiny bit sour. Crumb is extremely tender almost cake like and the crust is shatteringly crisp and caramelized. We love it. The second is the Apple YW crumb. Slightly sweet with no sour at all which is typical of YW. Very tender crumb as well and crust also delicious. The wheat flavor comes through amazingly well. I didn’t cut the batard it is a gift but I will let you know when it is cut on Nov 25th at a dinner we will attend. The crumb is so perfectly fine and uniform. The amount of time spent touching the dough is less than 10 min total.  after the initial mixing of levain/water/flour. All of the gluten development is due to time . The dough is SO extensible after Thank you again and I look forward to using Lee's flour .
Ian asked that I post something from my bakes (it has been ages).  So, here's today’s bread, a simple pain de compagne.  It's yeasted, rather than sourdough and will form the base for some DIY grilled cheese sandwiches for tomorrow's class.  The other bread the students will make is pain a la ancienne. This was all one batch of dough and the loaves went into the oven at the same time, so I’m not sure why there is such a difference in the amount of oven spring.  The most likely explanation, other than shaping differences, is that one pan was on the lower shelf to begin with. That put it closer to the steam pan.  Even though the pans were rotated halfway through the bake, the other loaves never expanded as much. Anyway, I do still bake, even though I don’t post nearly as much as I used to. Paul
Found some assorted grains tucked back in a cabinet. Sprouted them and made up a little 1-2-3 loaf. I often forget how much wonderful flavor that can add.  kamut, spelt, barley, buckwheat groats, triticale berries, oats
While looking through the kitchen pantry for inspiration, I came across a bag of Wild Blend Rice made by Lundberg. I normally use this rice for a wonderful Chicken & Wild Rice Soup made in the Crockpot but I had bought too much and this bag was sitting there saying to me: “You have been lusting after Ian’s Rice breads for some time, so here I am!”. Who am I to argue with a bag of rice? Ha ha! I have Peter Reinhart’s Artisan Breads Every Day and  between Ian’s posts and this book, I managed to put this one together. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Dough: 700 g unbleached flour 255 g Kamut berries 155 g Rye berries 20 g dried onions flakes 85 g dry Lundberg Wild Blend Rice (~240 g cooked) 585g water + 30 g 125 g buttermilk 50 g honey 24 g salt 200 g of 4 stage 100% hydration levain (procedure below) Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Dough day: Baking Day And if you are interested in the soup recipe, here it is: CREAMY CHICKEN WILD RICE SOUP [SLOW COOKER] YIELD: 8-10 SERVINGS INGREDIENTS: 1 cup uncooked wild rice blend (NOT parboiled) I use Lundberg Wild Rice Blend. 1 pound boneless, skinless chicken breast 1 cup onions, chopped 3/4 cup celery, chopped 3/4 cup carrots, chopped 4-5 cloves garlic, minced 2 bay leaves 6 cups low sodium chicken broth 2 cups water (or additional chicken broth) 1 tablespoons salt-free seasoning blend (such as Trader Joe’s 21 Seasoning Salute OR Mrs. Dash’s Original Blend) 1 tbsp Thyme 1 tbsp sage 1/2 tbsp Old Bay Seasoning 1 tbsp Chicken Bovril (concentrated chicken bouillon) 3 tablespoons butter 2 tablespoons olive oil (or substitute more butter) 1/2 cup all purpose flour 2 cups milk or light cream Seasoning salt and pepper to taste DIRECTIONS: Rinse the rice under running water. Place the uncooked rice, chicken breast, onions, celery, carrots, garlic, bay leaves, chicken broth, water, Bovril and all the spices and seasonings (do not add the seasoning salt or pepper at this time) in a slow cooker. Cover and cook on the high setting for 3-4 hours or on the low setting for 7-8. In the last 1/2 hour of cooking, remove the chicken from the slow cooker. Allow to cool slightly before shredding using two forks. When the rice is done cooking, add the shredded chicken back into the slow cooker. Melt the butter and oil in a saucepan. Add the flour and let the mixture cook for 1 minute. Whisk the mixture slowly while adding in the milk. Continue to whisk until all lumps have dissolved. Allow the mixture to thicken and become creamy. Add this creamy mixture to the slow cooker. Stir to combine. Add additional water or milk to your preference if the consistency is too thick. Season with seasoning salt and pepper to taste.
Hello friends! It's been a (long) while since I posted, not for a lack of baking though. Just been dealing with all sorts of chaos. I've been baking and re baking this seeded loaf trying new techniques and methods and it's been fun to see the different results. The formula hasn't changed much from my last post, except I've changed to a 100% hydration levain. I don't know if there's any real science behind it but I seem to get nicer results with a 100% levain as opposed to my usual 80% hydration. I've also stopped soaking the seeds, trying to incorporate wet seeds while laminating dough is hard. Has anyone ever tried picking up a wet pumpkin seed from a marble counter??? So frustrating... LOL! So now, I just sprinkle the dry seeds onto the dough while its stretched across my counter. The mix of seeds has changed too, I don't really measure how much of each type anymore, I just use whatever blend I have that adds up to 40g. Living on edge... Coil folds are my new dough development technique of choice. I find them more effective and gentler than how I do stretch and folds. Plus, it's a really great way to get the dough out of container and do a preshape all in one without destroying/over handling the dough.. This is one area I tend to struggle with, but doing a coil fold and then just lifting the dough out of the container, and using that as my pre shape too, seems to work for me. Here's the result: Really happy with how this turned out. This was my third attempt at a stencil and I was pleased with this result. I'm trying to figure out how to get a butterfly onto my loaf with scoring, my last attempt didn't really work. As we can see, the scores kind of exploded on me, so that was a bit of fail :( But I'll be trying this again soon, hopefully with better results! Happy baking all! Ru
A friend has a walnut tree and gave me some walnuts...So when I looked at my Tartine 1 book again there was a basic recipe similar to my usual 1:4:5 with 100g WW and the rest strong white flour and 100g leaven... So I followed the advice and toasted the walnuts in the oven which gave them an amazing flavour and surprised I had any left to bake with... I then followed a bit the @fullproofbaking route and after 30min one coil fold and then lamination after 1.5 hours in bulk and added the walnuts...Then 2 X hourly coil folds and then left alone for 1 hour or more until nicely risen but not too proofy.... No pre-shape and as only two loaves just divided and straight shaping and into bannetons. I left them ambient proof for 25 min and then into 4C wine cooler over night.... I just loooooove the taste and the second one went to my friend with the tree! Now, there is an interesting discussion going on about whether to pre-shape or not and triggered posts on IG after a talk by Ian Lowe at the UK Grain Lab event in UK. So, this is what I tried as the dough was strong enough, I thought and kind of the right shape to go into final shaping....need to look more into this....   Kat
So it really bugs me that I can get ok crumb on croissants but not (as Roman Moroni would say), fargin excellent crumb. One TFLer recently posted 'attempt number 4' or something crazy and posted the incredible crumb ever. What up with that man ! Looking at his recipe I noticed a lower hydration and thought I would give it a go today. As a result I turned out really nice shapes - every last one had 7 steps and weighed out between 90-100g - gee, that never happens - I usually get wild swings in weights coz wetter dough is harder to consistently laminate to uniform thickness. So all going well but still a bit underwhelmed by crumb. Oh well, the quest continues ... Some snaps for all y'all croissanteurs -
I came home to see that my levain was doing quite well in my Doraemon bowl! The CO2 got trapped by the cling wrap. Interesting. I mixed some unusual cassava flour this time. Cassava flour is gluten free stuff and this one was not toasted. I would like to try the toasted one sometime later on. The cassava flour needs to be hydrated before mixing. Since it was the first time I used, I hydrated with boiling water, but I think tap water would work just as fine. I did not keep a good track of all ingredients, but here it goes: 80 g levain at 100% hydration 25 g cassava flour at 200% hydration 170 g flour (12% protein) 30 g semolina 80 g WW 4.5 g salt 177 g water Total flour: 350 g Total water: 267 g I have done the standard procedure that I have followed lately: (1) Dissolve levain in water as well the cassava blob. It was a little gummy after hydrating, so I had to dissolve it by hands. (2) Add all flour and mix into a shaggy mass. (3) Wait for 30 min and add salt, kneading for 30 sec to 1 min. (4) Apply 3 sets of stretches and folds every 20-30 min. (4) Bulk fermentation needs to be about 4 hours. (5) Shape and retard in the fridge for about 6 hours. (6) Bake straight from the fridge on a 230 C deg oven for 45 min with lid on + 10 min with lid off (I started baking on a cold pot). (6) Wait to cool and slice Crust and crumb were quite good. Since the cassava flour is mild in taste I could not identify it in the final loaf. Note that cassava flour and tapioca starch are different things. The cassava flour is not fermented, so the flavor is mild. Since I scalded the cassava in boiling water, it felt as the tangzhong method. Being gluten free, cassava flour is becoming a good option for those with celeriac decease. You will find other names for the product including: cassava, manioc, mandioca, yuca, ...).
This morning's PdC made in a hurry; but good. About 6am I ground 25 g rye and 175 g of red winter wheat as fine as possible, then added 400 ml of water, a tsp of instant yeast, and 100 g of very good starter, stirring well. I put a shower cap on it and let it sit at 85F for a couple of hours. Then, I used a wooden spoon to stir in 400 grams of GM bread flour making a rough dough, put the  shower cap back  on it, and put it back its proof box for half an hour. I kneaded it lightly. and put it back in its proof box. it was still not a smooth dough. Then at 20 or 30 minute intervals,  I took it out and did a stretch/fold.  After 4 folds in the course of 90 minutes, the magic of the sour-dough had turned it into bread dough, and I let it ferment for an hour.  (I watch the dough, not the clock.) I shaped the loaf, and put it in a banneton with it's shower cap, where it sat warm for ~ an hour. A little after 10 am it went into a 400F oven for 35 minutes. It was served at noon with pea soup.  A mild bread, not a full flavored sour-dough, so it let the thyme and rosemary tones of the chicken stock used to build the soup come through.  It was good soup and good bread, but together they made an excellent meal.
My DH was asking for a plain sourdough. But it's a little too boring for me. So I made a high hydration loaf and coated it with sesame seeds. 500g Organic AP flour 262g water (over poured a bit) 150g Levin built from NMNF rye starter and whole wheat flour over 2 days 13g salt Autolyse about 20 mins flour and water. Add Levin and salt. Process in KitchenAid with dough hook for 15 mins. Bulk overnight in the fridge. Warm to room temp about 3 hours. "shape" coat in sesame seeds and proof again in the fridge, about an hour in banneton. Bake in DO 25mins and 30 lid off at about 460 DF.
I just had probably my last bake with a class of students at the college before it closes for good at the end of this year. This was a dough that they had down in their work books as a basic bread dough but i would have it down as an enriched dough as it had 8% butter and 8% milk powder, for me it would qualify as a vienna dough. It was a fresh yeasted dough  and made a nice selection of dinner rolls and a few loaves like this one i bought home.
I was thinking about grass a few days ago while finishing the last lawn mowing of the season and while not really appreciating my lawn grass as such, was struck by the fact that wild grasses are the archetype for the many grains we use to make our bread.  Many species/strains of wheat and other grains can trace their origins as wild grasses that have been cultivated, modified and preserved over many years as food crops.  So, with that in mind, I baked what I decided to call "Grass Bread", as inspired by the grass roots of our modern grains. 300 g fresh milled mix of organic rye/spelt/khorasan/Marquis wheat sifted to yield 250 g high extraction flour (bran set aside for coating the loaves); 750 g organic all purpose flour; mixed with 725 g water and autolysed for 2 hours at room temperature; then added 15 g sea salt, 250 g levain (4 hours, very active), mixed with a series of stretch/folds and set aside for a 4 1/2 hour bulk fermentation with more stretch/folds every 30 minutes for the first  2 hours; additions were mixed in after the second series of stretch/folds - 150 g cracked grain, steel cut oat porridge; 50 g cooked hulless oats; 50 g cooked hulless barley; 75 g cooked wild rice. FDH estimated at 85% after additions. Pre-shaped and rested for 1/2 hour then final shaped and cold-proofed overnight (10 hours).  Baked directly out of the fridge covered at 500 F for 25 minutes; 450 F for 10 minutes and then uncovered at 450 F for 20 minutes directly on the baking stone.  Oh, and almost forgot...before setting the loaves into the baskets I coated the loaves with some of the sifted bran, ground pumpkin and sunflower seeds (not grass, I know) and toasted hemp seeds (some would say "grass"!)  I am very happy with this bread. Of all the loaves I have baked this one is my absolute favourite - taste, texture, nutritional composition - who knew grass could be so good?
Haven't baked in a while as dealing with family health issues.  Finally ran out of bread so had to bake and I wanted something different.  I liked the bread I baked for 123 community bake so that was my starting point. Pictured loaf is based on 123 but flour mix is: bread flour 65.5%, Kamut 14.5%, Spelt flour 10% Durum 10% and hydration ended up at 84% approx with 1.8% salt.  Usual 200 slap and folds followed by coil folds 4* 30 minutes apart. preshaped, rested 30 minutes, shaped and left on bench for an hour before retarding over night. Really nice light yellow crumb, soft and delicious. 2nd bread was also based on 123 buts different flours and seeds. Bread flour 65%, Barley flour 10%, Rye flour 10%, durum flour 10% potato flour 10% and 2% salt. Hydration ended up at 89%. Toasted seeds: chia 6%, Quinoa 6% sesame seeds 6%  and ground flax seeds 6% plus 2% yoghurt. Method as above, incorporating seeds at autolyse. only 30 minutes bench rest before retarding. Nice loaf you can really taste the seeds.  Not sure about quinoa though. Final bake was a straight forward white Yeastwater/sourdough with overall hydration of 80%. This sprung and bloomed beautifully. really happy with it. Sorry, time has run out for me today and I have to run.  It was a great overall bake especially after a month of doing no baking. Bake happy everyone Leslie
I haven’t done this bread since the spring so it was time to give it a shot with the slap and fold method that I have been using for the last little bit. I increased the amount of whole grain a bit to get a bigger and healthier loaf. Hoping that this isn’t too much for the 3 quart Dutch ovens I have. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves 200 g spelt berries 200 g rye berries 200 g Kamut berries 820 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax 950 g filtered water 26 g Himalayan pink salt 40 g local yogurt 280 g 100% hydration levain (procedure for this is in recipe) Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Main dough: Baking Day Well, I guess I should reduce the amount of dough a bit since the loaves all have flat tops from hitting the lid! 🙄 Otherwise, I am pleased with this version! Crumb shot when we cut into one.
Wanted to post this because I got schooled by this today. The recipe was the basic sourdough from The Bread Baker's Apprentice. I added a significant amount of additional floor because what I was using was new to me and the dough didn't feel right. After 4 hours of bulk rise (also and fold every 30 minutes) I tried to shape it into batards and they would not hold. I couldn't get what I thought was the right surface tension, and they rose flat. I almost have up but figured at the worst is have good crutons. Glad I didn't give up though... The oven spring totally saved the day.
These are such fun I can’t believe I never made them before! I substituted about 15% milled and sifted hard white wheat for part of the bread flour and increased the hydration accordingly. Happy Thanksgiving everyone! -Brad
Tremendous oven spring! Sliced after cooling for 5 hours. I forgot this is a 90% rye, and the crumb was not set yet. The hardest part of this bake was finding a light-colored medium rye flour. I used KA's white rye (90%) and Giusto's Ultimate Performer (10%) With Rus's instructions, the rest of the procedures was a piece of Dear food slicer, my hands thank you! Springy and tangy slices, love them! Thank you, Rus! Rus's instructions
happy thanksgiving !
I don’t know why I do this to myself but I am doing Xmas Sourdough orders again like last year. The plan was to simplify and only offer two kinds of breads but somehow, I can’t say no and I am doing 3 kinds. And not only that… last year, I limited my orders to 36 loaves… somehow things go away on me and I am doing 48. So that means 4 baking sessions as I can only make 12 loaves at a time. On top of all of this, I have a bunch of other commitments that I can’t get out of. So the next 2 weeks are going to be crazy. Hopefully, someone doesn’t end up maimed or dead at the end of this! So I apologize in advance if I am not going into as much detail as usual. First baking session is a Cranberry Wild Rice with Pepitas. Makes 3 loaves Wild Rice: 75 g raw wild rice 10 g buckwheat groats Soaker: 60 g pumpkin seeds, raw 150 g cranberries 200 g water 30 g honey Dough: 700 g unbleached flour 200 g kamut berries 200 g spelt berries 575 g water 30 g yogurt 22 g salt 250 g 100% hydration 4 stage levain A few days before: Two days before: The day before: The day of: Baking day: I got okay but not great oven spring for some reason. Maybe I shouldn’t have soaked the cranberries and added the add-ins later...
My wife and daughter said I had to make Thanksgiving Dinner on Sunday a few days late because they missed our dressing, sides and especially the Cognac gravy for the sweet and golden potato smashed that wasn't served at cousin Jay's.  I missed the brown sugar carrot and butternut squash and braised / baked little cabbages.known as Brussels Sprouts.  For the dressing,  we always mix some yeast white, cornbread and some sourdough for the dressing bread mix. This time we got out the last of Yippee's Bordinsky for the sourdough portion and made the cornbread and poolish white bread from scratch.  The 123 was made to total 300 g of Lafama flour total, including the 1 of the poolish so the cocktail loaf would fit in the Mini Oven easily along with the Mega steam. If you have ever wondered how Lucy gets her maga steam in the Mini oven she takes a Pyrex 1 cup measure and puts 2 lava rock in it and fills it nearly to the brim with water.  She microwaves it for 2 minutes to get it hot and then puts it in the back of the oven preheated at 450 F to get it really steaming after 5 more minutes - then i  the bread goes for 10 minutes before the steam comes out and we bake at 425 F convection for another 15 more minutes to get it to 207 F. This one had no autolyse but did get 2 sets of slap and folds of 125 and 25 slaps each and then 2 sets of 4 stretch and folds all on 2 minute intervals after the 100% hydration poolish got bubbly 3 hours after it was mixed.  It went into the cocktail pan a bit small but really puffed itself up over the next 2 hours to rise 1/2 inch over the rim in the middle and then it got the 3 B;s and sprang well above the rim by 2" in the middle to look like a little bloomer in the UK - very cute. If you are going to make foot long buns you should at least make the sausages a foot long too instead of have them come in at 10".  I really need a new apprentice :-) These are spicy Italian.  Our latest batch of Dijon mustard is still way to hot to use and needs at least another 2 months of aging and maybe even 90 days. We won't cube it up until it cools down later so the cubes can dry out by tomorrow afternoon.  My daughter hiked to the bottom of the Grand Canyon and back up in 7 hours today so I hope she will be recovered enough by tomorrow afternoon to help make dinner or I will be very cross with her for sure.  Bloomers get me talking British it seems:-)
I'm planning on doing some regular weekend baking and started this weekend with a batch consisting of a 70% hydration sourdough shaped in several ways. This batch made a boule, batard, baguettes, dinner rolls and sandwich rolls. 12% WW flour and 7% rye flour.
This is baking batch #2 of the Xmas sourdough orders. I want to thank Wendy (Lazy Loafer) for outlining her method of bulk fermentation in the fridge and proofing/baking the next morning in her posts as I used this for the first time to accommodate my schedule. Recipe Makes 3 loaves 696 g unbleached flour 4 g vital wheat gluten 250 g high extraction red fife flour (I milled 285 g of red fife berries and sifted it. Save the bran for the levain) 50 g buckwheat flour (I used 50 g of buckwheat groats and milled them) 1 tbsp of dried Italian herbs 725 g water 150 g of shredded 4 cheese mix (parmesan, Asiago, provolone and mozzarella) 100 g caramelized onions 36 g full fat plain yogurt 20 g salt 200 g levain (explanation below) Plus high extraction whole wheat flour (local Brûlé Creek partially sifted flour) for levain The morning before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day: The loaves are a bit misshapen due to the parchment paper. I have to figure that one out.
A simple sourdough boule, 65% hydration, 20% liquid levain. I used 100% buratto flour from Mulino Marino and there was no cold fermentation.  I figure I've been making some version or other of this loaf now for over 25 years. I guess that means I'm getting old. Hopefully I'm getting better. That's the thing with bread, there is always another loaf and it always has something to teach you. Funny how the simplest things are the most elusive. Happy Monday everyone....
I said starting to , not nearly as knowledgeable as many on here but having fun.
Xmas batch # 3. One more batch of this same recipe and I’ll have all my Xmas orders done! 😊 Makes 3 loaves INGREDIENTS 770 g unbleached flour 110 g high extraction Red Fife flour (Mill 125 g Red Fife berries and sift. Save the bran for the levain.) 50 g freshly ground flax 1 tsp vital wheat gluten 620 g filtered water + 25 g 180 golden raisins (sultanas) 180 dried cranberries 35 g plain yogurt 2 tsp ground cinnamon 3.5 tsp of mixed spices (4 tsp ground cinnamon, .5 tsp each of ground ginger and ground cloves, 1 tsp each of ground nutmeg and ground coriander - Note this makes more than you need.) 22 g salt 465 g of 4 stage levain (100% hydration)(Procedure in recipe) Extra flour to feed the levain. Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Dough day: Baking Day The boules were super firm when I tipped them out of their bannetons so I wasn’t sure what to expect. I was a very happy camper when I took the lids off after 30 minutes. They sprung nicely and smelled amazing! Quite pleased with these!
I made Reinhart's Sunflower Rye from BBA, and it was a nice change from our typical 10% WW/rye sourdoughs that we've been making. A tighter crumb than I'm used to getting from lower % rye recipes, but still very light.
Cousin Jay sent me this article about the death of the Montreal Bagel.  Maybe we will have to import Canadian wood into NY and bake NY bagels in a WFO and sell them back into Montreal.  The best of both worlds maybe? https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-the-death-of-the-montreal-bagel/tter than either.
I baked this one before I left for my annual pilgrimage to North Carolina for Turkey Day but didn't have a chance to post it until now. I have to say, this one is like a Challah on steroids.  It is packed full of flavor and super moist which you expect from the porridge addition.  It would actually make a great bread for leftover turkey. The addition of the ricotta really pushed this one over the edge and you would never know it is 45% whole wheat. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, eggs, ricotta cheese,honey and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 550 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
One of the breads for tomorrow's Festive Braids class. Paul
Paul
I made Reinhart's Sunflower Rye from BBA, and it was a nice change from our typical 10% WW/rye sourdoughs that we've been making. A tighter crumb than I'm used to getting from lower % rye recipes, but still very light.
I tried to use some fresh dill from the garden. My idea was to roast few cloves of garlic, but at the time of mixing I realized that I had forgotten to roast them. So I decided to use few cloves of black garlic that I had available around here. The following were the ingredients 86 g levain (whole wheat at 100% hydration) 30 g semolina 100 g blended whole grain berries (60 g whole wheat + 40 g rye) 167 g bread flour 174 g water 4 g salt Handful dill 5 black garlic cloves - chopped Process Dissolved the levain in water, added all the flour and mixed into a shaggy mass. Waited for 30 min to add salt, dill and black garlic, kneaded for 1 min to incorporate. Applied 3 to 4 stretches and folds at 20 ~ 30 min intervals. Bulk fermented for about 5 hours, shaped and stored in the fridge for another 5 hours. Baked at 230C for 35 min with lid on + 3 min with lid off (oven and pot were preheated). The loaf bloomed OK, the crust is crispy and the crumb moist as expected. The fresh dill has pretty much disappeared while the black garlic can still be seen. The texture is similar to adding raisins or cranberries. However, I think the black garlic made the flavor quite savory. I still want to fine tune and use roasted garlic to make things a bit more subtle.
Long time since I shared my breads here, was trying to read more than bake, trying to understand the dough at each stage of the prepare. The temperature here has increased a lot, my kitchen is always at 28-32 celsius degrees, day or night. The main problem I am having with my doughs are in shaping, it has been so hard to shape lately, sometimes the dough feels nice at the BF, holding shape nicely after the coil folds, but when I try to shape it become loosely, air escaping on the sides and cant hold the shape anymore. It is very difficult to move the dough to the banneton, but I do and when I bake it will turn in a disc, but well fermented bread because of the long retard at the refrigerator. Well, I'm reading Trevor's book, and seems like under fermentation is my problem. My starter is ok, my levain get ready in nice time, so I am not pushing BF enough or maybe I am unable to develop the dough structure with strenght. I need to read more, for sure. But yesterday I had a better result, it's clearly to me that this is a case of "fools crumb", still better than what I was having. Now let's get to what matters, how I did the bread of the pictures. Levain was build from 6g of starter, 3 feeds 1-1-1, 100% hydration. 1000g final dough, 68% final hydration, 2% salt, 10% levain. It's 100% white flour. I did a premix (flour, water and salt) at 6 am and put it in the refrigerator. At 1 pm I removed and let it rest on the counter. At 5:15 pm I added the levain, mixed very slowly to not break the gluten that was developed at the premix and started the coil folds. As the dough was holding shape already, I did folds with 1 hour interval aproximately, when the dough spreaded enough. At 10:40 pm it seemed the dough was fine, some bubbles on the surface, not sticking a lot and holding shape for longer time. Here I changed my plans, usualy I turn the dough on the counter and pre-shape using my bench knife and turning the dough in to a boule, but I decided to remove and pre-shape at the sametime using the coil folds. I put the dough on the counter and it holded shape nicely, 20 minutes and it almost not spreaded, so I decided I was not going to shape anymore, I just used the bench knife to try to create some tension scraping the dough on the sides and moved it to the banneton and to the refrigerator. At 8 pm of the next day I removed it to bake, it standed tall and firm after removing from the banneton in to the pan, it was really easy to cut. Baked for 20 minutes with lid, 25 without it, all at 250º C. At the temperatures of my kitchen, a BF of five hours seems more than enough to me, it's hard to believe it was under fermented, but I think I should probably let it BF for more time.
figured a few tricks - these are browning evenly every time now with zero muffin top / bottom.  Will follow up with some more pics of the process for those interested ...
Something about the holiday season and the general prettiness of them gave me a hankering to try my hand at challah bread. Mind you, I don't think I've had it since childhood, but I remember a golden, shreddable crumb under a toothsome crust.TFL is loaded with all kinds of challah recipes and I finally decided upon zolablue's sourdough spin on Maggie Glezer's recipe, which seemed accessible enough for a relatively new baker and an absolute beginner when it comes to challah.Starting the morning before, 8g of my 100% rye starter got transformed into 35g of stiff white starter. Early that evening, the 200g of stiff levain got made. Never made a stiff levain before, it was extremely neat and tidy. It was supposed to ferment at room temperature overnight, but knowing that I needed to be out in the morning, I left it out until about 3:00am and then stuck it in the fridge to slow things down. Possibly mistake number one.The next morning, the levain was taken out of the fridge to continue at room temperature while I went about my business. When I came back to it in the early afternoon, it had about tripled and was full of bubbles, so I mixed up the dough.Except, never one to leave well enough alone, I decided that I wanted to add in some grated orange zest and ground coriander. And that, while I was at it, to use orange juice in place of the water. Probably mistake number two.The recipe says to knead the dough for no more than 10 minutes. Tu parles! I had a shaggy, wet, sticky (but very fragrant) mass that needed about an hour of SLAFs to come together. Not a happy puppy.Well, it did finally -- sort of -- come together, and I let it rest for a couple of hours.Came the time to shape, dividing the dough in two, then each half into six pieces and rolling them out to ropes. I don't think I found a "best way" to do them until about the sixth rope, by which time I was beginning to worry about the remaining dough drying out, despite the cloth covering them. So the next batch of rope was of a slightly fatter caliber (in retrospect, that made for a plumper loaf, which I preferred). Braiding was the easiest (and thus my favorite) part.Egg wash and rest. Recipe called for five hours, till tripled. Well, it was already 10:00 pm. Five hours would have meant baking at 3:00 and probably not getting to bed before 4. Hmm. I dithered about it briefly and was too nervous about retarding the loaves, since I have no idea what an enriched dough does when it's put to sleep. So I stuck it out, waited four and a half hours, gave the braids a poke and decided to preheat the oven. They hadn't tripled, but they weren't bouncing back at all quickly, so I thought it would be better to bake them under- rather than over-proofed. More egg wash, sprinkle on poppy seeds, into the oven for about half an hour. They smelled wonderful, and as I peered through the oven door, I was relieved to see that none of the braiding had torn. And out of the oven they came. Not as zaftig as I'd hoped, but not the puddle I had feared, either. I cut it open this morning and was surprised by the crumb. Not shreddable, not golden! Harrumph. But wonderful as toast, with a taste of childhood. I will most definitely be trying this again, especially if I can avoid the sticky, wet phase that this bake went through. So, some questions: Any and all feedback are welcome, as always. Happy Hannukah!
I first baked proper, PROPER panettone last year, with sweet starter (lievito madre) fed every 4 hours - even getting up at 4am for it - and I have to say it's a serious project. Patience, hard work, at least some bread-making skills, standing mixer (can't really imagine without it), lots of leftover egg whites, a warm place for proving, a warmer place for growing the lievito, hanging apparatus - it's a mission. But the end result is really worth it. I made five large ones at one go last week, doubling the ingredients and I was completely exhausted afterwards. The recipe - or rather instructions! - can be found on my website: CuisineFiend's traditional panettone if anyone's interested.
I got 48 loaves done for my Xmas orders, and these are 12 extra loaves for those who missed out on the original ordering. I have a dear friend that owns a Fresh Fruit Bouquet place and she gave me space in her commercial freezer to store the loaves. These orders are being picked up there so she offered to do a mini Open House where a few of us will be selling pottery and a few other crafts. We have done a wee bit of advertising and so hopefully we will all sell some of our wares and make a few more people happy. I think I am crazy for having baked 60 loaves over a couple of weeks. On another note, you will see that I didn’t mill any flour for this recipe. I had a big bag of Wholewheat flour from the local miller so I decided to use that as it really is very good flour and I was feeling a tad lazy. I am still surprised at the amount of bran that I get out of his flour compared to mine. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Recipe: Add-ins: 150 g dried cranberries 131 g crumbed feta (sheep’s milk feta) 50 g sunflower seeds Dough: 188 g sifted wholewheat flour from Brûlée Creek Farms (bran sifted out) 770 g unbleached flour 50 g freshly ground flax seed 725 g filtered water + 15 g 30 g plain yogurt 21 g salt 240 g 80% hydration levain 142 g of wholewheat flour from Brûlée Creek Farms (sifted to separate out the bran and used for the levain) Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day
I have been fiddling with flour types and quantities for my regular weekly bake using 123 as the base formula with an overnight proof in the fridge (~4C).  I enjoy a mix of white and whole wheat, and recently added some rimacintata.  I am really pleased with the results I am getting with 61% white, 21% whole wheat and 18% De Cecco semola rimacinata - quite a delicate, tasty and moist, but not gummy, crumb.  The main pic was (slightly over-) baked this morning, the one inserted below is from mid-October. The famed “123” formula is such a useful template for any variety of loaves, but I think it has caused be to become less adventurous since October’s anniversary bake! New year’s resolution is to renew acquaintances with Mr Hamelman 😉
I’ve been playing with freshly ground heritage varieties lately, this is my latest foray into freshly ground wheat. I bought 2 pounds of locally grown Frassinetto wheat berries at the farmers market last week. Since my wife has given up on trying to be gluten free, I’m now allowed to use our old Nutrimill. Yay! I built my levain from DABrownman’s NMNF starter, many thanks for that scheme! I used last week’s leftover RedFife flour and bran for the feedings. For the dough I used 70% Central Milling’s ABC+; 30% freshly ground and sifted Frassinetto; 2% salt;12% levain; overall hydration of 79%, which I’ll increase 1% at a time over the coming weeks until the dough exceeds my shaping abilities. As is my habit, I used the dough hook of my Ankarsrum mixer to bring the flour and water to a shaggy mass and removed the hook for a 2-hour autolyse. After adding the salt and levain I put in the roller and mixed with external heat applied for 8 minutes, 15 minutes rest, and 4 minutes more. My desired dough temperature is 83dF, it’s challenging to get the dough warm enough to get the yeasts and bacteria moving. After about 3:45 in bulk ferment with 5 sets of stretch and folds I divided the dough at 815g, preshaped and rested for 30 minutes before shaping two boules by stitching and putting them into rice floured, cloth lined bannetons. After a few minutes they went into the 38 degree fridge for 16 hours. In the morning After preheating the oven to 500 degrees with my Dutch ovens inside I took them out of the fridge, slashed, and got them into the Dutch ovens as quickly as possible. Reduced the temperature to 450 after 5 minutes, removed the lids after 20 minutes and reduced the temperature to 425 for another 17 minutes. I’m pleased with the rise and oven spring, and the crust is nicely blistered. After about 6 hours I couldn’t resist cutting one open although I haven’t quite finished the last loaf. Taste Will have to wait until tomorrow. I still have some work to do to get the elusive open crumb but I’m happy with this for now.
All of my other bread related obligations are done, so I can finally bake for the family. Cedar Mountain had posted a wonderful recipe that he called “Grass Bread”. This is an almost identical recipe with a few tweaks from me. Thank you, CM, for sharing that recipe. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Add-ins 25 g hulless oats and 75 g water 38 g wild rice and 114 g water 25 g barley flakes and 75 g water 63 g large flake oats and 125 g water Dough 75 g rye berries 75 g spelt berries 75 g kamut berries 75 g Red Fife berries 750 g unbleached all purpose flour 725 g filtered water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 40 g local yogurt 250 g 3 stage 100 hydration levain (procedure in recipe) Wholewheat flour/all purpose flour for feeding the levain Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day Oven spring was pretty good and the loaves look quite festive with their coating of seeds.
Here is a tasty straight dough bread that is as tasty as it is simple to make.
I usually only put seeds on the outside of my breads but I decided to try adding it to the porridge and see what happened. Well, I was pleasantly surprises at how tasty this one came out and the seeds add a nice extra burst of flavor as well. The crumb was nice and open and moist as well.  This one is worth trying for sure. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the water called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the water is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the water and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, olive oil, ricotta cheese, and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
This is my first brioche attempt, using Hamelman's recipe with commercial yeast.  I'm quite proud of it, but I'm not sure what it's really supposed to be like.  I'm not sure how cakey vs. bready it's supposed to be.  It certainly looks and tastes great, but I'm wondering if it's cakier than I'd like. The problems I encountered were first that the pre-butter-addition mixing did not go as planned.  The dough was very dry, and was straining the machine.  So it's unclear to me if I achieved proper gluten development pre-butter.  Second, I'm not sure if it was adequately mixed post-butter to achieve the "sheeting" effect.  It's a very gooey dough, and it did get a bit of a windowpane, but I became afraid that I was going to overwork it if I didn't stop mixing at some point.  In all it was in there for 25 minutes or so, including several short couple pauses to inspect. I would appreciate any thoughts people have on these questions.
For the past few months, I have been baking breads with 40% home-milled mixed whole grain flours. I have been playing with various combinations of whole wheat, rye, kamut and spelt. The hydrations have been between 78 and 83%. I have found the flavors wonderful, but the crumb a bit dry, especially after freezing. Last week, I returned to a bread with 30% whole grain flours and 81% hydration. The crumb was more open, and the crumb was cooler and less "dry" feeling. The flavor was subtly sweeter. I think my 40% whole grain breads need higher hydration, even than 83%. Stay tuned! I have also been thinking for some time about trying some new (to me) rye breads. This week, I made Hamelman's "Sourdough Rye with Walnuts." This is a 50% whole grain rye bread. It is leavened by a firm rye sour and a bit of instant yeast, but it also contains a significant amount of un-pre-fermented rye - 40% of the total rye flour. The amount of walnuts is high - 25% baker's percentage. It is very tasty, especially good with cheese. I hope you all are having wonderful and delicious holidays! Happy baking! David
It is nice to see others actually doing it today. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QTL8z5pbmHU https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BHR5hyTBnSM https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUUob15LOf8 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=41IXziKSCtw&list=PLJMp5K0iCc88nac8oMFPrd62TH3fsKxY- Happy building sustainably
We spent the month of November in northern California, where we lived for 15 years.  In SF for Thanksgiving with long long time friends, we stopped at one of the Arizmendi Bakeries that dot the bay area.  Among other delectables, we picked up their Sesame Semolina Jalapeño Cheese breadsticks, which we both fell for immediately.  Upon return home my wife asked if I could try to duplicate them.  So… Looking for guidance here on TFL and the other sites, what I mostly saw was what would qualify as Grissini, those tall slender and sometimes gnarly things. I wasn’t interested in those near ubiquitous Skinny Minnies that are posted everywhere, nor those overly cheesy soft things that made a number of appearances as well.  No.  What I was after was a crisp sesame coated semolina version with some real girth to it.  The idea being to come as close to duplicating those treasured batons that we picked up in SF. I relied on Jeffery Hamelman’s "Semolina (Durum) Bread" formula as my template, and then modified it to suit.  With the swapping out of the olive oil for more water and the addition of the two cheeses and jalapeños, this was no longer a Hamelman but an Alfanso with the nod to Mr. H.  This is a dough that uses an aggressive sponge, ready in 75 minutes in my 78-80dF kitchen. At 80g each, the breadsticks baked in a 460dF oven for 13 minutes with steam, 6 additional minutes and then 2 minutes more for venting.  And for a first time, I did not remove the parchment paper from under the dough.  Too delicate and messy to bother with. The Arizmendi breadstick, the real deal, exhibits both a pronounced cheese flavor as well as at the bite of the jalapeño in the back of the mouth.  I’m not quite there yet in either department, but the first inklings of the stronger taste are just beginning to show through.  Still have some work to do. Here is the formula normalized to 1000g, which is what I used for this bake. Finely grate both cheeses Mix all sponge ingredients well.  Will ripen in 75 min. (in a 78-80dF kitchen).  CONCURRENTLY... During our absence our friend house/dog sat.  Upon our return I asked her which bread she’d like me to make for her.  She opened my looseleaf and while blindly flipping pages stopped on the Phillipe Gosselin Baguettes, levain version.  I have rarely made this in the 4 or so years since my first foray.  but as the lady asks, the dude abides. M. Gosselin is another luminary boulanger in Paris, another who, I believe, also won the annual competition for best baguette in Paris.  The formula that I use was posted on TFL by David Snyder back in 2012.    And as you can see, these make for explosive oven spring and a quite open crumb.
Hello Fresh Loaf Community, This is my first post on the site after reading recipes and browsing for the past several months. I have been really inspired and impressed by all the amazing bread I have seen here on TFL and want to join the conversation. The loaf was made using spent beer grains obtained from Somerville Brewing (Boston, MA) and naturally leavened thanks to Stefano, my sourdough starter. A few months ago, I took a bread making class at the brewery where one of the owners lead us through making a spent grain loaf with rosemary. That was tasty, but I wanted to improve the results using my starter. After taking some spent grain home and finding a great recipe on The Perfect Loaf (thanks Maurizio!) I began experimenting. During the beer making process, the grain is mashed, boiled, then separated from the liquid. The byproduct, "spent grain," is either thrown away of fed to farm animals. Instead of letting it go to waste, this batch of grain will instead go to feeding this animal, aka me, and feed my voracious appetite for artisan bread. With that in mind, baking with the spent grains gives me a deep satisfaction knowing that I'm putting something to practical use which would normally get thrown in the bin. I was pretty pleased with the crumb, which turned out light and airy, while maintaining a tender, chewy texture. This was a moderate hydration dough (80%) that produced a pretty light loaf. It had a nice nutty flavor from the grain, similar in character to a loaf with lots of whole whole wheat, but without any bitterness. Lately, I have been working on getting a consistent airy crumb with good rise and pronounced ears. This loaf seemed to have all three. Horray! Here's how I made the loaf: Yields 2 large loaves. 1. Levain build: 50 g starter, 50g whole wheat (WW), 50 g bread flour (BF), 65 g 90˚ F water. Let stand for ~5 hours in a warm area. 2. Autolyse 2 hours before levain is ready: 100 g WW, 50 g rye, 850 g BF, 700 g 90˚ F water3. Mix: Dissolve starter in ~60 g water then add to autolysed dough. Slap and fold for about 7 minutes then add about 20 g salt and slap/fold a few more minutes to achieve medium dough development. 4. In 30 minutes increments, fold the dough a few times. Add 250 g spent grain right before the second round of folding. I found my dough needed 3 sets of folds, your dough might need less or more depending on the efficiency of your slap & folds after mixing. 5. I let bulk fermentation go for about 3 hours, since the dough was progressing nicely. I let the dough sit for an hour after my last set of folds. 6. Divide and preshape. Let sit for 20 minutes after preshape and before final shaping. Then into the fridge for the overnight rest.7. The next day, preheated the oven to 500˚ F for about 45 minutes with my lodge combo cooker. I turned my dough into the shallow side, scored it, then baked with the lid on for 30 min, then removed the lid and decreased the temperature to 450˚ F for another 15 minutes. Happy baking everyone, -RR
Our oven has been rather busy lately, especially with the Christmas cookies that my wife likes to make at this time of year.  In spite of all of that going on, I still managed to work in three different breads yesterday. First up was the Tyrolean Christmas Zelten from The Rye Baker: These gems are essentially fruit and nut loaves lightly glued together with the smallest possible amount of dough.  Raisins, golden raisins, chopped figs, pine nuts, and any of hazelnuts/almond/walnuts spend the night in a rum soaker.  (I used almonds.)  Right alongside those, candied lemon and orange peel have their own beauty bath in white wine.  The next day, rye flour, all purpose flour, fennel, anise, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, lemon zest, orange zest, sugar, salt, egg, and water after blended into a dough.  After the dough has risen, both soakers are combined with the dough.  The soakers contribute enough liquid that the dough becomes more of a batter but you soldier on and shape three loaves on parchment or a pan liner.  After baking and cooling, the loaves are wrapped or bagged and allowed to ripen for a couple weeks.  These should be ready when the kids come to town for New Year. The second bread was Bagguettes with Poolish from Hamelman's Bread, Vol. 2. DF2CC2E8-4F65-4F72-B105-33A3DDEE7A18.jpeg The baguette choir was singing as these cooled.  Since my wife wanted these as the base for crostini, the less than stellar slashing isn’t particularly worrisome and the somewhat bready texture will actually accommodate the toppings better than a wide-open crumb.  “It's not a bug; it's a feature!”  Or something like that.  I used the metric quantities, divided by 10.  Per Hamelman, that should yield four 22-inch bagguettes.  Knowing that mine would be 15-16 inches in length, I opted to make six instead of four from the same batch. The third bread was a perennial favorite here on TFL, Cream Cheese Braids: There was a batch of unused blueberry filling lurking in the refrigerator from a recent class, so that was the primary motive for baking these.  Were I making them specifically for a holiday gathering, I might have chosen the cranberry filling, instead.  Since no one has ever turned these down previously, I don’t expect to hear any grumbling about them this evening. Sometime in the next week or two, I need to make a rye bread, too.  If anyone has a suggestion for one that would be a good analog for the miniature cocktail rye breads that sometimes show up at the deli, I’m all ears... Paul
I decided to do a test run of my planned bake for next week. For the last couple of years I’ve taken loaves around to our neighbors, this year it will be more than ever, 10 loaves. I still have to work out how to manage that, 2 at a time in my oven.  I’ll be studying Danni’s posts for ideas! When I’ve used cranberries before I thought it was too much, so this time I scaled back the cranberries to 30% of the add-ins and upped the walnuts to 70%. Total add-ins 11% of the dough weight. I mixed 592 g of CM ABC+ and 254 g of sifted, freshly ground Red Fife with 657g of water and left it for a 90 minute autolyse with 18 g of salt sprinkled on top to dissolve. Then I added 108 g of 100% hydration levain (3-stage bran-fed from NMNF, retarded overnight) and mixed for 6 minutes, rest 15, mix 3 minutes, rest 15, and mix 3 more minutes before putting it into my bulk fermenting container and into the proofer. Overall hydration 79%. I’ve been experimenting for several weeks with a novel method to get my dough temperature up where I want it for bulk ferment. Especially this time of year, the house is rarely over 66 degrees F and as I usually have to get done in one day due to limited refrigerator space, I want the dough to ferment at 82 to 84 dF.  Because I use an Ankarsrum mixer, I’ve taken to using a heat gun on low power on the outside of the rotating bowl while mixing, keeping track of the dough temp with an infrared thermometer as I go. This works great, I can easily and gently warm the dough 20 degrees in under 10 minutes without getting any of it too warm. Then my cobbled-together proofer-cum-storage box can just barely keep the dough warm for a few hours, it was never able to warm it effectively. I did 5 sets of stretch and folds on 30 minute intervals, adding 127 g of coarsely chopped walnuts and 53 g of chopped, dried cranberries after the second set. After 3:45 I judged that it was ready so I divided the dough in two, did a pretty tight preshape (the dough was pretty stiff, I’ll increase the hydration next time from 79 to perhaps 81%) and let it rest for half an hour before shaping 2 boules and proofing at 84 dF. My shaping was a bit uneven, I think because the dough was stiffer than what I’m used to. I didn’t get the oven hot in time so it was still heating up when I thought the dough was ready after 1:30 and I had to wait another 15 minutes. The dough spread quite a bit when I turned it out and slashed it so I was worried the loaves would be pretty flat as I loaded them into the preheated Dutch ovens. Baked at 475 for 5 minutes, 450 for 15 minutes, then uncovered the Dutch ovens and baked another 17 minutes at 425. Turns out I got decent if not spectacular oven spring and some small ears. In the morning I was anxious to see how the crumb turned out and was pleasantly surprised. The loaves were less than perfectly round to put it charitably, I guess I could say they have a rustic look. ;-) Well that’s ok after all. I Won’t. Change. A. Thing. for next week. I’m very happy with the flavor of this bread, the walnut flavor is forward and the cranberries are more subdued but definitely there. Really good toasted with butter.
Just another white bread, bulk was longer this time,  almost 10 hours. 21 hs at the refrigerator. It was more easy to shape, but still difficult. Liked the result. Trevor's book is being really helpfully.
Bread making is fun, even just making basic white bread
I am hosting a (hopefully) traditional Greek Christmas eve dinner and wanted to make Christopsomos.  Does anyone have a good recipe they would like to share? Thanks,
For this bake, I used Hamelman's Vermont Sourdough (10% whole rye) as my base, but I made a few modifications for flavor and dough handling. I've made this recipe before and enjoyed it, but I found the dough a little too stiff when shaping, so I increased the hydration from 65% to 75%. I did this by making a rye soaker the night before, hydrating the rye at 100%, without reducing the water in the final mix. This particular loaf retarded overnight (around 13 hours) in the fridge. And here's a pic from when I took the lid of the combo-cooker off. I'm still working on my stencil skills-- some of them came out better than others.
What recipe to make? Ihave been dithering for days. so decided to make 2 sorts and see what I end up.  Sorry Abe, might try your suggestion another tme. Crusty Rolls 320 g flour 3/4 tspn yeast 1 tspn salt 283 g water. Mixed it all up then did slap and folds, but it was a dreadful dough. reread recipe from web - its a no knead recipe, duh! I added about extra 60 g flour, did about 100 Slafs, rested 10 minutes, did a few more, ok it is a bit better now.  Leave to double. did a set of stretch and folds after 30 minutes. Then once it had doubled it tipped out on bench, and as per insteuctions did bunch of s & f. divided dough into 9 approx 70 g balls, proofed and baked at 230° c for 25 minutes. Really disorganised today, forgot to write timings down so this was pretty hit and miss.  They have baked up ok, tasted ok with soup for dinner. No crumbshot, balance frozen.  Just disappointed in size after baking. Maybe should have proofed longer. Soft rolls. 268 g flour 30 g wholegrain spelt 18 g dried milk powder - nope, dont have any, leave it out! 50 g sugar (that looks a lot, don’t want sweet dough, 15 g will do) 1 tspn salt 1 tbspn instant yeast 113 g whole milk (used 122g, to make up for no milk powder - my reasoning was a bit off I think) 1 egg 57 g butter. (only had 50 g that was soft so went with that). Tangzong 14 g flour+ 43 g milk + 43 g water. Cooked then cooled. All ingredients placed in bowl and using mixer kneaded until window pane.  It took forever.. maybe 25 minutes in my Kenwood chef. Left to ferment and it was very active. After about 60 minutes I divided into 9 approx 70 g pices and rolled into balls. Proofed maybe 40 minutes, brushed with egg wash and baked at 180° c for 25 minutes Wow! what a different bake. here they are side by side soft roll and crusty We haven’t tried one yet, cut it though to see the crumb and will eat later.  They are feather light! Well I will make this again for sure, next time in a cake form so they touch and go upwards during proof and bake as per recipe.  I didn’t want that this time so will try again.  Taste test will dictate any modifications. It is funny doing 2 yeast bakes, it sure was different to SD. Leslie
Yesterday I did my big bake of ten loaves to take to the neighbors for the holidays. After lots of head scratching I decided to work in two batches, the second following 2.5 hours after the first. For once I had plenty of refrigerator space available but only 6 bannetons and 2 Dutch ovens (actually I have more but the oven will only hold 2). I built my levain the day before, using leftover sifted whole wheat and bran sightings, about equal amounts, and put it in the fridge overnight. I started early and mixed the first batch in my Ankarsrum with dough hook and scraper and left it to autolyse for 1:30, then added salt and levainand mixed with roller and scraper for 2 minutes,and transferred to my bulk container, freeing up the mixer for the second batch. I was able to raise the temperature of 3.6 kg of dough from 65dF to my target 84 in ten minutes with a heat gun blowing on the outside of the rotating bowl. Bulk ferment took about 4 hours with 5 sets of stretch and folds, adding walnuts and cranberries after the second set. It was hard to find enough warm places for the dough to rise, especially in final proof. I ended up rotating 2 bannetons at a time through my proofer and a cooler with a microwaved rice bag for warmth, and guessing when to chill them to await their turn in the oven. I guessed wrong on a couple loaves, underproofed but not too badly. The main dough was 70% CM ABD+, 30% sifted Red Fife, 2% salt, and 80% hydration. The levain was 12%, and the add ins were 11% of the dough weight (30% cranberries and 70% walnuts). The trouble with all that bread is that I also needed to make some for us to eat in the next week, so I built another mostly-bran levain in the midst of this, and today, because my poor little pea brain was tired, I did a simple 1-2-3-bread with white flour Crumb of this one: So that was a busy weekend! Tom
Woke up Christmas day to find a very active primo impasto. Illustrated recipe: https://www.dissapore.com/ricette/panettone-iginio-massari/ Merry Christmas everyone -Michael
Follow the yellow brick road To Babka land. I have done a deep dive into Babka bakingCulminating in packing two large loaves in my suitcase and traveling with them to Texas! Where they have been the hit of the breakfast brunch
Hello TFLers! Long time no read! I miss all of you and this great community.It's been a while and I've been very busy with work. I'm already three months in the service and I just harvested the fruits of my labor. You're asking why I'm asking if I should change my name? When I had my first salary, I bought an oven to I don't know how to put it into words but all of you who have done the same back then would know. :)I bought a 68-Liter one, not too big when testing recipes but big enough when I double or triple a tested recipe. It also has some pretty fancy heat controls with various combinations for rotisserie, top, bottom or convection. I also needed to reset my mind and math because it is in Celsius. It can go to a maximum of 250°C which is 482°F, a little lower than most ovens but I guess, with convection on, it will be almost the same.I'm new to my oven so I just tried simple baked goods in it. What I want to really try are some pizzas and lean hearth breads but I don't have a pizza stone and if I have one, I don't want to waste a lot of energy in preheating it. I need to find a way to replicate its thermal properties along with steaming the oven. It's difficult but I know you will be there to help me, right?  :) I was so happy. We were so happy. So what do you think? Should I change my name PalwithNOoven? If I should, what name/s do you suggest? I would like to hear them.It had a 7 day replacement warranty so immediately the next day after I bought it, I tested it in case of any malfunctions and then baked day after day for the next 7 days after work even if I was super busy. Sorry for a ton of photos, I was just happy and a little overwhelmed of with using my oven because it's the first time that I have seen and experienced this. :)Here are some of them:Rotisserie chicken with Filipino flavors (Lime, Lemongrass, Soy sauce)Garlic Rice and Chicken  Casserole I got a little happy with the broil function so it was a tad too dark, but it was not burnt in real life and we love the texture and flavor.A repeat of the same dish.Cantonese Siu Yuk (燒肉) (I'm not sure if these are the characters) Crispy roasted pork belly flavored with wine and five spicesA soft and fluffy Sourdough Asian-style Milk BreadBrown Sugar Peanut Biscotti Mini Banana BreadsTheir humps remind me of a Madeleine's.What do you think? Did you have a favorite? Let me know! I want to know where I am since I am new to "oven" baking.I did not only harvested financial fruits due to my profession but instead harvested more important fruits in the form of my students. In just three months, I have a accumulated a lot of tales and experiences that will be treasured memories for all of us in the bond. I'm so privileged to have those kids in my life that I get emotional sometimes when I reflect on my career. I want to tell more but I really can't put it into words now, maybe some other time.Wishing you all good health and happiness! Thank you very much!
Woo! This week has been busy! From baking naturally leavened panettone to focaccia to cookies for Christmas, I've been scrambling around and hoping that everything will turn out well. I was actually able to settle down and make a nice sourdough loaf (which I'm still a newbie at), and I think it turned out pretty well! I followed the pain de campagne recipe from FWYS and was pretty happy with the result! Crispy crust, relatively open crumb (though definitely could be more), and nice flavor from the levain. I had a hydration around 73% because I was scared it would be difficult for me to handle, but it wasn't too bad. I will probably up the hydration in the future. Saw this recipe for smoked trout toast, which we happened to have a friend that smokes food for us, so I had to try it out: So delicious! Anyways, hope everyone had a successful holiday baking time. Next up, New Years!
I have not posted anything for ages. It has been a busy year full of life changes, gardening and travelling. I mainly stuck to my usual recipes. But I received the recipe for this interesting cake in West Australian Yoke Mardewi's December newsletter. Just had to try it and it is delicious. Next year should be more settled with lots more experiments in baking, roll on 2019! Recipe here: http://wildsourdough.com.au/recipe/wild-sourdough-spelt-khorasan-christmas-cake/
Just happened to grab a picture that gives a pretty good feel for the oven spring I tend to get from a cloche. And, it also shows the cloche. That seemed like enough reason to post it.
For this bake, I followed the Modernist Bread recipe for chocolate cherry sourdough, with my only modification being leaving out the instant yeast. (https://modernistcuisine.com/recipes/chocolate-and-cherry-sourdough/)I wasn't sure how it would turn out, but the bread was a big hit.
Cedar Mountain’s Grass Roots Bread - Mixer Version This is my first shot at using a mixer to make bread. I spent some time researching what would be best to ensure the same results I have been getting by hand. I finally decided to stick to Trevor’s method but replacing his initial mixing and his Rubaud method with the mixer. Then I followed his sequence of folds as per his Tartine loaf recipe with the addition of a side trip to the fridge to finish off bulk fermentation. This was a really wet dough as I didn’t drain the hulless oats or wild rice as per my first shot at this recipe. I found it a bit harder to judge the dough hydration when my hands weren’t in it. I expect that will come with more practice. *So for this recipe, I have added the extra step of draining the wild rice/hulless oats mix which I didn’t do. * Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Add-ins 25 g hulless oats and 75 g water 38 g wild rice and 114 g water 25 g barley flakes 50 g large flake oats 175 g water Dough 75 g rye berries 75 g spelt berries 75 g kamut berries 75 g Red Fife berries 750 g unbleached all purpose flour 725 g filtered water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 40 g local yogurt 250 g 3 stage 100 hydration levain (procedure in recipe) Bran/all purpose flour for feeding the levain Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day The oven spring was pretty decent considering how wet and floppy this dough turned out. I definitely have some learning to do to adapt  to using a mixer. Crumb shot to come later.
https://www.landwatch.com/default.aspx?ct=D&pid=333007320&mltmid=23111
The temperature for bread baking seems to vary greatly. Some recipes recall for 230º C others 250º, some for 225º C some 220ºC, some recall for two different temperatures. A higher one on the first 10min and later lower temperature for the rest of the bake. while this dosen't seem to be a big deal in a home production environment, when you start baking on a professional oven you realise that lowering the baking temperature can be a hard and wastfull thing to do. When real hot a professional oven gains such thermal inertia that takes very long to decrease the temperature (sometimes not decreasind at all) unless proper measures are taken like openning the oven doors and vents to ensure the temperature lowers...and that will show up on your electricity bill in the end of the month as an energy waste (considering that you ll have to put temperature up again for the beginning of the next bake) This takes me to this question: Considering that lowering the temperature is so hard and high temperature baking temperatures would represent a higher electricity cost, what would be the minimum baking temperature for optimum results when baking bread. ensuring that bread has proper oven spring, and fully bakes before burning?? I have done a few experiments, and notice no relevant difference between baking the same loaf at 250ºC and baking at 235ºC when it comes to oven spring. Wonder if 225ºC - 230ºC would be enough?? if yes, absolutelly no point on putting it to the 240ºC - 250ºC, also cause it tends to burn some types of bread before proper crust thickness is atchieved. I usually bake 1,5 Pounds loafs. I would Like to know your experiences, and opinions about this topic, and what temperatures you use for baking.
My wife complains that I never make her simple white bread so to be nice a few weeks ago I made my version of a "simple" white sandwich bread.  I had to sneak in some whole wheat of course and added Ricotta Cheese to help make it nice and soft like she prefers. I used 1085 grams of the dough for the loaf pan and make a couple of rolls with the left-over dough.  Probably could have used all of it in the pan and it would have worked out fine. She seemed to be happy with the way this one came out and I was as well.  It was very tasty and made great grilled cheese sandwiches as well as toast for breakfast. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, Ricotta Cheese, honey and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 475 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 425 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. If desired, brush the top of the loaf with some melted butter after you remove it from the oven. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Cosmo, AKA "Panda Bear" helping me work!
I've made bread with cider before and always like the sweet flavor it imparts.  I decided to add some roasted white sweet potato to this one and it really helped create a super moist crumb.  I was actually pleasantly surprised at how moist this crumb turned out.  The flavor was fantastic and this bread is the perfect sandwich bread for some pastrami or any deli meat. Please note, white sweet potato is not as sweet as the orange type and the water content is less so if you use them instead, you need to adjust your hydration accordingly. HAPPY NEW YEAR from Max and Lexi! Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the cider for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, sweet potatoes, olive oil and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 525 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
As I am on a long holiday vacation now and school starts again just after the New Year, I decided to use this opportunity to make some viennoiseries before the year ends.I made some sourdough pains au chocolat in my new oven to celebrate 2018 and the New Year. We are just minutes away from 2019 here! I have received so many blessings this year: from passing the board exam, becoming a licensed professional teacher, having a highly rewarding profession in many aspects, to having a new oven; I have so much to thank for and words are not enough to thank the Lord!My posts are always wordy but I am going to keep this one short and sweet and just let the photos do the talking. :)I will not roll them as thin during the final roll-out next time so the honeycomb structure will be bigger and more defined.Doesn't look that far from my clay pot version. Right? :) I just did not put as much chocolate this time.Clay Pot Pain au Chocolat May 2016Oven Pain au Chocolat December 2018I wish all of us a more blessed happier and healthier 2019! Happy New Year!!!
I scored a wondermill for 30$! We have a kitchen aid one but I don't like how hot it gets. When I saw this I had to snap it up! I am going to experiment in the next few days yay!
To start the year, I baked one of the most difficult yet luxurious Filipino breads, Ensaymada! It originated from the Mallorcan Ensaimada but the Filipino ones are very different from its ancestor that someone said they should go by a completely different name. The Ensaimada Mallorquina was more like a croissant, flaky and laminated with lard; the Filipino Ensaymada (Notice the use of a masculine adjective for a feminine noun and different adjective placement?) is brioche like, a soft rich bread. Our ancestors have really made it our own. Notice how the spelling changed to reflect Filipino orthography? Before WWII, when Spanish was still a prevalent lingua franca in the country, it was used to be spelled Ensaimada and made with lard (lard brioche, I can't imagine how good it was.) that clearly reflects its Spanish ancestry.It is made with flour, milk, egg yolks, yeast, sugar, salt and butter—lots of butter! This is a bit more modern yet still traditional way of making them; remember lard was the traditional fat of choice. They are then coiled like a snail and placed in fluted molds then baked until rich brown. THEN, as if there was not enough butter and sugar already in the dough; it is brushed with more, (lots of) softened butter and sprinkled with sugar and occasionally cheese, aged cheese. I know, it sounds weird to put some cheese on top of butter and sugar but that's how we love it and as you know; Filipinos love the combination of salty-sweet/sweet-savory. Traditionally queso de bola, a local version of aged Edam cheese is the topping of choice but some dress theirs even more: people in the capital city of our province top them with salted egg and ham in addition to the cheese.It goes well with Tsokolate de Batirol Filipino-style hot chocolate which I forgot to take a picture because we were in the moment of eating this ensaymada. It's the best we've had. We have never tasted anything like it before.They are usually yeasted but I decided to make a sourdough version and it's my first time making this bread. Two breads immediately came to my mind; panettone and pand'oro, both super rich but naturally-leavened. I had a failed panettone earlier last year so I am challenged and determined to try make a similar bread and succeed. I followed the general outline of panettone recipes and combined it with the steps and ingredients of various Filipino ensaymada recipes. The difference between my ensaymada and panettone is mine is less rich in sugar and butter (the topping compensated for this :D) in the dough but definitely richer in egg yolks.This one was made with three doughs before the bulk ferment. No additional water of milk, all of the hydration came from a ton of egg yolks. The only water came from the stock starter and the small levain build. My hands got soar the next day due the intensive kneading required but I was extremely pleased when I saw how strong the windowpane was after the last of the butter was completely absorbed! :)Final proof was quick despite the high amount of sugar, only 4 hours at 24C, imagine how it would have went if it was a hot summer day! The dough was already more than doubled when I put it in the oven. I baked it at 190C for 25 minutes. Oven spring was non-stop for 15 minutes, I was a bit concerned that it might fall over due to it being unable to support its own weight but luckily it did not. The dough expanded 4-5 times in the oven all created by my starter. She is that strong now.After cooling, I slathered the Ensaymada with a generous amount of softened butter and sprinkled it with white granulated sugar and grated a good amount of cheese right on top of it. I could not find the traditional cheese so this one had some sharp cheddar on it. Enjoy!They were so tall and light, they collapsed a little bit after cooling. I should have went the panettone route and hanged them upside down to cool. I think they could have been lighter had they not collapsed a bit.The Ensaymada was very rich yet light which makes it all the more addicting and dangerous. I could detect a slight slight tang but it was masked or actually played well with the rich, buttery, and sweet flavors. The saltiness and savoriness of the cheese balances the sweet flavor of the bread and the topping, and adds another dimension of richness.The crust was a bit crispy and flaky. The rich brown hue to which it was baked adds to the overall flavor of the bread. The crumb has a rich golden yellow color from all of the free-range egg yolks from our own chickens. The high number of yolks also added a savory note to the bread. Ensaymada is a bread that harmoniously floats in the middle of the sweet-savory continuum; it's up to you to which direction to push it. The crumb is very shreddy, and feather light; I feel like it's the right crumb for a pand'oro or panettone and so I feel more empowered to make them in the future and I think I have a higher chance of success in making them which just a few more modifications. It's really lighter than air!Unfortunately, my photography skills doesn't seem to capture the lightness of the Ensaymada. I don't know why the rich golden hue didn't show either in the photos. I'm sorry too, if most photos were out of focus. :) They just look better in real life.Ensaymada CrumbHappy New Year!!!Happy Baking in 2019!!!
After some time without baking I am back with a repeat formula based on a mix of bread flour, whole wheat and durum. Roughly 180g bread flour, 80 g whole wheat and 40 g durum. The levain contained 15% of the total flour and the total hydration was 75%. The room temperature was about 16C. I built the levain the night before and processed the dough during the day. Below is the crumb shot. Wish you happy baking in the new year.
After years of reading these helpful blogs, I am reaching out for help.  For the past 20 years, I've been baking bread in my home kitchen.  Recently, I started using a Blodgett gas oven with a metal deck 30x42 at a local church to see if I can dramatically increase production and still maintain the quality I seek.  My initial goal is to move from 4 to 8 loaves in my Dutch Oven at home to 50 in the Blodgett gas oven.  The idea is to start a small bread shop in my hometown.  I've baked a couple of patches of pain de campagne at 78% hydration in the Blodgett oven. While the loaves exhibited the oven spring and maintained the taste, the crust failed to achieve that deep rustic look.  Instead, the loaves came out ashy.  Very disappointing. I've inserted a pan filled with hot water at the point the loaves went into the oven (temp. 450F) and sprayed the loaves with a hand-held bottle but to no avail.  The loaves just don't have the Dutch Oven look I get at home. Can I achieve that deep, dark reddish/blonde crust in a Blodgett oven?  I've attached an image of my first attempt in the church oven.
In Tucson built in 1880.  Also has no garage or parking on the property   Be the first one to own this one! https://www.zillow.com/homes/for_sale/Tucson-AZ/pmf,pf_pt/239061547_zpid/7481_rid/globalrelevanceex_sort/32.572277,-109.831696,31.756196,-112.342072_r...
Einkorn flour truly made a difference in both taste and texture. I only used about 10% of the total flour weight in this recipe. Happy New Year everyone
Just pulled this from the oven about 20 minutes ago and can't wait to dig into it. We had cooked a turkey this past weekend and wanted to make sandwiches...but of course we needed a bread built just for such an occasion. So...I set to work with the breadcalc spread sheet and this is what I came up with.Starter:Levain @ 50%: 100%/3ozWater: 50%/2ozKAF Speacial Flour: 90%/3ozKAF White Whole Wheat Flour: 5%/1ozFinal dough...All the starter: 25%?...I didn't weigh it, just threw 'er inKAF Special flour: 80%/ 12.25ozKAF White Whole Wheat Flour: 10%/1.5ozKAF Pumpernickle Flour: 10%/1.5ozWater 73%/11ozSalt: about 1tsp (I estimated from here on out...)Fresh sage, chiffonade 2TblspDried lavender, crushed 1Tblsp or so (still estimating)homemade dried cranberries...about a cupI let the starter do it's thing overnight. Mixed all the ingredients to the salt up, autolyze 10 minutes, knead with a mixer for 5 minutes and let them sit in bulk ferment for 2 hours (slap and fold every 20 minutes or so). Then, I put the dough on a lightly floured board, added the rest of the ingredients to the pile and kneaded until well mixed. Back to bulk ferment for another 1-2 hours--no slap and fold this time. Shape and rise in a banneton for about an hour, preheating the oven to 500 degrees toward the end of the rise (no time here...I just turned it on and walked away). Prior to the preheat I put a sheet pan in the oven upside down so it would get nice and toasty before I placed the load on it. Gently transferred the boule to parchment paper on a free sheet, cut my pattern, then transferred to the sheet in the oven. Added steam every 5 minutes for the first 15, then dropped the temp to 400degrees where the bread did it's thing for about 30 minutes (internal temp of 190). Of course, 1/2 way through the 400degree time I rotated the loaf 180 degrees.Here it is on the way in...quite tasty too if I do say so myself.
dmsnyder Recipe Index http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/11667/dmsnyder-recipe-index Foolproof 1-2-3 sourdough for beginners http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/56678/123-sourdough-no-knead-do-nothing-bread Emile Henry baguette Baker http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/40245/emile-henry-baguette-baker
This is based on Danni's Peasant Bread...thank you Danni !  I milled my spelt, rye and kamut and ground the flax seed. I sifted out the goodies  from the flours. I have never done this before but decided to give it a try. I used two different starters that I have had going for a while. Not sure what they are but one was fed only AYW and the other was fed only durum...but that was before and they were now going be on a " water and goodies" feed :). They loved loved loved it. Tripled in 2 hrs. Boom !  I did an autolyse with just the flour and water for about 2 hrs. Folded in the levain and salt. Bulk fermented for a couple hours with only two s and f's as I went to play with my grandson. Came back and the dough had doubled . Yikes. Quickly made 3 rough boules and put it in the fridge. My new procedure as of my last bake is to let it ferment at least 36 hrs. Amazing how well it does. Will look forward to seeing the crumb as last time not only did I get great oven spring, and this time too, but I had amazing open crumb.  Baked at 500 then 475 in my granite roasters. crumb shots...lovely tender a little sour and beautifully open
https://www.mexicoinmykitchen.com/ and the top 15 Mexican Food Blogs are https://blog.feedspot.com/mexican_food_blogs/ Yes I'm making instant pot Cicken Chili Verde to put over my Chicken Chili Verde Tamales for tonight's dinner:-) Happy New Year
Sourdough Bagels (adapted from Hamelman's bagel formula in Bread) David M. Snyder January 2, 2019 Almost two years ago, I converted Jeffrey Hamelman's formula for bagels to sourdough, although I did continue to spike the dough with instant yeast. Since then, I acquired my Mockmill 100 and have been baking almost everything with at least some freshly milled flour. Today, I baked a batch of bagels using 24% home-milled whole white wheat. The rest of the flour was Breadtopia's "High-protein Bread Flour." These are by quite a bit the best bagels I have ever made. They may be the best I have ever eaten. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein bread flour 705 76 Whole white wheat flour 223 24 Water 538 58 Barley Malt Syrup 5 0.5 Salt 18 2 Instant yeast 11 1.2 Total 1500 161.7 Makes 13 113 g (4 oz) bagels. Note: For this bake, the High-protein bread flour was from Breadtopia. The whole white wheat flour was freshly milled using a Mockmill 100. Liquid Levain Ingredient Wt (gm) Bakers' % Hi-protein bread flour 200 100 Water (85ºF) 200 100 Active liquid levain 80 40 Total 480 240 Dissolve the levain in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Place in a clean container and ferment until ripe. 8-12 hours, depending on vigor of your starter and the ambient temperature – 76ºF is ideal. (For a liquid levain, this means the surface is bubbly and wrinkled. It should smell fruity, not like raw flour and not sour.) If not ready to mix the final dough, the ripe levain can be refrigerated for up to 3 days. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (gm) High-protein bread flour 520 Whole white-wheat flour 223 Water (85ºF) 353 Barley malt syrup 5 Salt 18 Instant yeast 11 Liquid levain 370 Total 1500 Procedures In the bowl of a stand mixer, place the water, ripe liquid levain and malt syrup. Mix at low speed until these ingredients are well-blended. In a separate clean bowl, combine the flours, salt and instant yeast. Add this mix to the liquid ingredients a third at a time, mixing each addition at low speed until well-blended before adding the next. Mix at medium speed until an early gluten window forms (6-8 minutes). Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Form into a ball and place in a lightly oiled clean bowl. Cover tightly and ferment at 76ºF for one hour. The dough should be almost doubled in volume. Transfer the dough back to the board and divide into 113 g (4 oz) pieces. Pre-shape into rounds and allow to rest, covered with a towel, for 20 minutes or so. Form bagels from each piece. Degas gently. Form a tube, as if shaping a baguette. Roll each tube into a cylinder (not tapered) about 12 inches long. Wrap this around your open hand, with the ends overlapping under your palm by 2-3 inches. Roll your open hand back and forth on the board to seal the bagel. If it sticks, flour the board lightly. If it slides, wipe the board with a very slightly damp towel. Place the bagels with at least an inch between them on parchment-lined baking sheets sprinkled with semolina or coarse cornmeal. Cover with plasti-crap or place in a food-safe plastic bag and refrigerate for at least 6 hours or overnight. (I find quarter sheet pans most convenient. Each holds 6 bagels.) Pre-heat the oven to 500ºF (with an optional baking stone in place). In a large sauce pan (4 quart or larger), bring water to boil with 2 tablespoons of barley malt syrup. Take as many bagels as you can bake at one time out of the fridge. Boil the bagels right out of the fridge, 3 or 4 at a time, 15-20 seconds on each side. They should float. Remove the bagels to a cooling rack placed over a sheet pan. If topping, press the top or both top and bottom, if desired, into a pie tin containing the topping of choice. (If the bagels' surface is too dry for the toppings to stick, place a damp paper towel on a baking pan or another pie tin. Put the bagel on this for a moment before pressing into the topping mixture.) Then place the bagels on a clean, parchment-lined baking sheets sprinkled with semolina or coarse-ground cornmeal with at least one inch between them. Repeat steps 10. and 11. until all the bagels have been boiled and topped. (Note: If you cannot bake all the bagels at once, leave the ones you cannot accommodate in your first bake in the fridge until the first batch has been baked, then repeat steps 9.-11. with the remaining bagels.) Bake for 15-18 minutes, until the desired degree of brownness has been achieved. Cool on a rack for at least 30 minutes. Those that are not to be eaten right away can be frozen for later consumption. These were baked this morning, so freshly baked for breakfast. I had one half with a lox shmear made yesterday ... I don't know how my local Whole Foods Market knew I would be baking bagels today, but yesterday, for the first time I can remember, they had genuine Great Lakes Smoked Whitefish! So, that's what I had with the other half bagel for breakfast. Very yummy stuff! For your interest, this was not actually my first bake of 2019. Yesterday, I baked some more multi-grain sourdough, which continues to be our favorite "daily bread." You can see it here: https://www.instagram.com/p/BsJ7lDLjnSc/?utm_source=ig_web_button_share_sheet Happy New Year to all my Fresh Loaf friends, and Happy Baking in 2019! David
This bread turned out to be a a great tasting one for sure.  My wife loves that it is a loaf shape but tastes like a sourdough.  It is bit more open than the last one that has more whole grains in it.  Still soft and moist and easy to cut with that new Wustof bred knife that come highly recommended.
My biggest challenge is scoring my loaves.  I never ever get all 4 small (500gm) loaves scored properly.  I remember reading  that a guy who worked full time in a bakery said it took him a full year to get the scoring right.  Today for once (in 4 years) I got all 4 right.  Crumb shot to follow (after dinner... lol)... Apologies for this small brag... Next time I'll be back at 50 or 75%... today I"m happy hester
One of my Christmas gifts this year was several pounds of barley and of oats to feed my home milling habit.  After noodling around here on TFL and the web, I cobbled together a formula to use some barley flour. Ingredients 400g whole wheat flour, freshly milled 400g whole barley flour, freshly milled 400g all purpose flour 5g malted grain (I used malted barley) 900g water 60g honey 24g salt 10g active dry yeast Process Autolyse the flours, malt, water, and honey for 30 minutes.  Mix the salt into the dough.  Mix the yeast into the dough. Do three sets of stretch and folds at 20-30 minute intervals.  When the dough has doubled from its original volume, divide into two pieces.  Shape the loaves and place them in prepared bread pans. (I used 8x4 pans but this amount of dough will be more at home in two 9x5 pans.)  Ferment the loaves until they have nearly doubled, then bake in a preheated oven at 375F for 50-60 minutes until the internal temperature reaches 195F. Notes Overall, I’m pleased with this bread, considering it was very much a seat of the pants experiment with a flour that I don’t know well.  It rose well, is moist, and has a lovely flavor that is milder than a whole wheat bread.  The honey isn’t enough to make the bread sweet but it does play up the other flavors.  The texture is firm.  Although the bread is somewhat more prone to crumbling than an all-wheat bread, it holds together fairly well. The crumb is more open than I had expected, perhaps because of the stretch and folds instead of a more vigorous kneading.  The compression visible around the edges is due to excess dough for the pan size, rather than over proofing. Judging from the oven spring, it may actually have been mildly under proofed. I will play with this again.  I'm curious to see how molasses would combine with the other flavors, for instance.  At 33.3% barley flour, it probably isn’t worth pushing for higher percentages. It is a hefty bread as is and the crumb openness would suffer with an increased barley content.  I also wonder if I might nudge the diastatic malt content slightly higher.  That might improve the crust browning. If anyone has pointers, I’m open for suggestions. Paul
It must have been a good year! T65, which passes for bread flour here, has usually maxed out at around 11% protein. A few months ago, I found a bag at 12% and felt as though I'd struck gold. Well, I must have hit the mother lode, because this new T65 organic flour clocks in at 13%! So I bought a 2.5-kilo bag of it and have been happy as a clam. Another recent find was heritage/heirloom stone-ground T80. I believe that T80 would pass for "high extraction" flour in the States; at any rate, it's got 11% protein. It has a lovely color and perfume. So, those are the two new flours. Over the holidays, I found toasted multi-grain flakes, which I started to use for a soaker/scald, and it's been making the most lovely, moist and keepable crumb. So I think that's just going to be part of my mix from here on in. There was the soaker. Using Wendy's (LazyLoafer) basic white formula, I made up a dough of 50/50 T65 and T80, added about 80g of scald and a couple of handfuls of bag-end seeds. The plan was to make up the dough in the evening, retard until after work the next day, then shape, proof and bake. Does stone-ground flour move faster than roller-milled? When I checked on the dough 12 hours later, it was already large and proofy, bordering on wobbly. (The advantage to being self-employed is that you can just decide you'll go in to the office an hour later than planned.) So, rather than let the dough over-ferment, I preshaped, rested and shaped the loaves, then put them in the fridge until later that day. After work, took the loaves out of the fridge; they'd grown a bit. I gave them a gentle poke, decided they were feeling too dense and let them hang out at room temperature for about an hour or so. After which time they definitely were taking their time springing back after a wee poke. They weren't as jiggly as loaves I've baked before, but I thought maybe baking them slightly underproofed was better than the opposite. Baked these together for about 22 minutes covered, 20 minutes topless and then another 10 minutes with the oven off and the door cracked open. I think I wimped out; I wonder if the loaf wouldn't have a bit more loft if I'd let the proof at room temperature go another half hour? The scores barely opened, but the taste is great and the crumb is good. So that's the new year's resolution: try to figure out when to bake. Happy new year to all of you, and keep on baking!
Here are the top 100 ETFs over the last 10 years based in average yearly returns The top 25 returned more than 15% annual returned and the bottom 25 returned more than !0.5% Over the past 44 years the Dow 30 and S&P 500 ETF's averaged more than 10% returns including dividends and the Nasdaq 100 returned 13.33%  w/o dividends annually over the past 44 years - Wow!  That is the entire time I have been investing  in the stock market  before there was and Apple or even a Microsoft! But this isn't unusual it has been the same for 91 years!  So when you hear the stock market is too risky remember that it is the only sure fire way to really make a mountain out of a molehill - regardless of IQ, talent and Income.  A great way to gain financial security.  Sadly if you live in Europe, not including the UK, your task is 5 time harder since your markets and businesses do not perform like they do in the USA but the UK performs at about 70% of the US though Happy investing over the next 91 years. PS.  Retiring well just take time and investing 10% of your take home pay every payday from the time you are 21 until you retire at 65 years old and this is if you are making minimum wage of $7.50 an hour - just invest $25 a week.  That's it  If you invest it in the Dow 30 ETF you will have $1,335,982 in today's money taking into account 3% inflation that would be  $386.044 and pay you $15,411 in today's money in yearly retirement income..... more than you will make in SS payments by a wide margin. But, if you invest in the NASDAQ 100  you will have $1,071,073 in today's money - the beauty of choosing wisely and compound interest.  That would pay you $42,870 a year in retire income in today's money.  Tell me where else a minimum wage earner can become a millionaire by ding so little?  Well, there isn't one!  Imagine every minimum, age worker would be a millionaire in today's money when they retire at 65 years old.  Taking care of yourself is way better than having the government steal 80% of what they should pay you in retirement for what you put into SS.
Hello, Do you prefer to sift your fresh milled flour? What would be the main reasons to do so or not? This bake is about 50% bread flour mixed with 50% non-sifted fresh milled whole wheat and rye. The hydration is 68% with 18% fermented flour. No autolyse, 5.5 hours bulk fermentation and 5 hours in the fridge after shaping. Baked out of the fridge on a cold pot and cold oven. In general I am pleased with the result and the crumb is soft and aerated. Mind you that I milled the grain in the blender, so the flour is kind of coarser than commercial.
Happy New Year to All... I have not posted very much but my first bake in 2019 was using 50% Strong White Marriages combined with 50% Swiss Ruchmehl that I ordered before Christmas from a supplier in Germany. I don't know much about this flour but it was so smooth during baking and tastes a bit like a Pain the Campagne with a rustic taste... Love to experiment with different flours and would buy this again, if available in UK. Never mind... Kat
Here's the starter at Day 1, prior to scraping off the loose coarse flour: Day 4 levain just mixed prior to referment: Day 5 levain prior to use: Baked loaf: And the crumb: Lance
I continue to work with multi-grain sourdough breads using home-milled flours. Today, I baked two loaves. Both used the same dough, a mix of Central Milling ABC flour, whole Sirvinta wheat, Spelt and Rye. The Sirvinta whole wheat is the thirstiest I have ever encountered. For today's bake, I boosted the dough hydration to 85% with good results. I mixed the doughs for each loaf separately and folded in 20% each dried cranberries and lightly toasted pecans in one of the doughs. Photo Gallery I'll confess: The Cranberry-Pecan loaf was first out of the oven, and I couldn't wait for it to cool completely before having a few slices for lunch with some delicious Emmental cheese. The crust was crunchy and the crumb was very moist and tender. The cranberries mostly contributed sweetness and chewy texture. They have less presence than the sour cherries and dried figs I have baked with before. All in all, a nice combination of flavors and textures. The "regular" loaf had a lovely crackly crust and a more open crumb than achieved with lower hydration doughs. Just about perfect, to my taste. You may note that I most often shape these breads as boules and bake in cast iron Dutch ovens. These loaves were shaped as bâtards and baked on a pizza stone with steam. When baking on a stone, I bake at a slightly lower temperature (465ºF versus 475ºF). Happy baking! David
Decided to make my first adventurous sourdough an Irish one and also wanted to bring porridge into it as i haven't tried that yet. So i settled with a strong cheddar + stout/oat soaker. I was thinking the stout soaker would be a good idea as the oats would soak up the stout/alcohol and wouldnt effect my bulk dough performance as much to try make the results a bit more predictable. My last 2 bakes have been Tartine country bread so i loosely based this recipe and process off that. Gathered my ingredients: Decided with the crafty brewing company Irish stout over a predictable Guinness as its more malty and sweet. The cheddar is one we normally buy, nice and mature flavoured. At 11:00 am Gave starter second feed of the morning. Started autolyse by mixing all the flour (white/ ww / rye) with 500g of water. It was dryer/firmer as i withheld the stout for the soaker. Made soaker by mixing 150g oats and 250g stout... at 11am in the morning i was tempted to finish off the other half of the bottle!! At 12:30 my starter was lovely and bubbly so i added 200g to the dough mix. I withheld the soaker and salt as i wanted to give the dough a head start - i was afraid of possible effects from the alcohol in the stout. At 13:00 i was ready for my first S&F so i added in the soaker, salt and cheddar. The 100g of cheddar was just a guess amount and i cubed it rather then grate as i wanted it to be found through the bread rather then incorporated/lost. I S&F every half hour at room temperature 23C. It was 18:00 before i was ready to preshape - was amount 30% bigger and loads of bubbles. During the S&F the cheddar kept breaking the surface but by the time i got to pre-shape the dough was elastic enough to hold it all in Arounf 18:45 both loaves went into baskets and into the fridge for overnight proofing. 9:00am next morning i heated oven to max which turns out to be about 230c on the thermometer. Baking stone on the bottom rack with a pyrex bowl preheating. Baked at 250c for 20mins with bowl and a further 25mins uncovered, I also moved the rack up to middle of oven for last 25mins. After 20mins: After baking it out: The Cheddar can be found in its own pockets all over :) Overall im delighted with this one, crust is really stouty/malt flavoured as that flavour was enhanced by the dark bake. Inside has a lovely cheddar flavour throughout. The crumb looks very irregular in the pics but i think the cheddar played its part in that.
I had an excess of sweet potatoes in the pantry so it was time to try a bread with potatoes in it. Thank to whoever mentioned that sweet potatoes are 70% hydration. That really helped in making sure I didn’t end up with soup instead of dough. 😳 Makes 3 Loaves Ingredients Morning or mid-afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day I got great oven spring! Will have to wait until we cut into one to see the crumb.
Used the Mock Mill to grind my cornmeal. There isn’t much information out there so had to experiment. I ordered 6# of Hoosier Hill Farm yellow popcorn. Haha I was optimistic about my new project! I used “10” to start thinking it would be good for polenta. I then took out one cup of that and moved down to “5” then “1”. The cornbread is amazing with fresh ground corn! But there are a few crunchy bits. I reset the mill to get a new set of “10” finer grinds. I started at the new “10” then went to “5” and then tried moving toward “1” but the mill stalled. I quickly moved back to about “3”. Perfect! I was using the same cup of cornmeal for the regrinding. The info I would pass on as a result of this is: buy good quality popcorn, start on your coarsest setting and work down. Depending on what your desired recipe is you can go coarse for polenta and finer for grits and finer yet for cornmeal. Do not buy dent corn as it is field corn and intended for 4 legged critters. The ultimate would be fresh corn cut off the cob and dehydrated and then ground. That’s my plan come Summer. The cornbread is made with buttermilk and tastes like pound cake. Truly wonderful especially baked in my Mom’s antique iron skillet 😊❤️ Served hot with local honey... yum!
I haven't cut one open yet to see the crumb but my first time using spelt and was fun to do.
Leftover brandy from all those festive season plum puddings and cake.  So I decided to make Sweetened Brandy Buns for brekky in the new year. Not nearly as sweet as I expected. It is quite good with something more savoury, butter and a gentle cheese like a gouda. From The Handmade Loaf by Dan Lepard.
Still very much liking Wendy (Lazy Loafer)'s 1:2.8:4 formula, I've been trying to come up with a way to bake during the week, and I think we're getting close. These are a 50/50 mix of T65/T110 (I believe T110 is roughly equivalent to first-clear flour), with 150g of rolled-grain scald (1:2 flakes:water) and a small handful of miscellaneous seeds (poppy and fennel, mostly). And some improvised bread spice. Day 1 (very) late: Made the first stage of the levain, left it to ferment at room temperature until morning. Made the scald. Day 2 morning: built the second stage of the levain, left at room temperature. Went to the office. Day 2 late afternoon: stirred down the lovely, bubbly levain, whisked together flours, sprinkled salt over the bread spice so I wouldn't forget it. Then went about dinner prep. Day 2 after dinner and clean-up: mixed levain and flours and let rest for about 30 minutes. Added the scald, spices and salt, and mixed using about 150 SLAFs with a 20-minute rest about halfway through. Rested 30-40 minutes, then two sets of letter folds on the bench about half an hour apart. Then into the fridge, with freezer packs beneath and atop the dough tub, since our fridge takes its time to cool things down. Day 3 morning: removed dough from fridge. The freezer packs seemed to have worked a treat; the dough, while only slightly bigger than the previous night, was nowhere near as proofy-looking as the previous bake. I let it warm up slightly and gave it a set of folds, then back into the fridge -- without the freezer packs -- and off to the office. Day 3 late afternoon: removed dough from fridge, let it warm up about 90 minutes, divided, preshaped, rested, shaped and proved for about 90 minutes. The dough felt nice; airy, mildly tacky, soft. I had thought the proof time would be longer than that, but the loaves had grown by about 25% and the dough was feeling "ready". Baked together in my improvised roaster. I tried two different shaping methods (if you could call it that): the loaf on the left was rolled up "backward croissant" style (starting with a triangle and rolling from the point to the base). The other was an attempt at a more "traditional" approach (start with a rectangle, fold one third toward the middle, then the other third toward the middle, seal each time, and then fold the thing in half and seal it). I scored each one differently, so I could tell them apart after baking. It would seem that the more "orthodox" way does give a more disciplined looking loaf, but that may also be the scoring, since it looks like the cuts opened better on the lumpy loaf. So the next step would be to shape them both the same way, but score each one differently, I guess. Unfortunately there may not be a crumb shot, since the plan was to give these away. But that may change :-D So, while these are not as beautiful as so many other loaves here, I'm pretty happy with this bake, and especially thrilled that I seem to be working out a process that accommodates time away from home. Wish I could taste these. Update: Crumb shot! Well, grandsons couldn't decide if they were coming or going, so one loaf was given away and the other, "disciplined" loaf was finally cut open. Here are the first couple of slices: Still a long way from the lovely, glistening crumb that more talented bakers get, but I'm happy with the progress. Crust is thin and crisp. I need to calm down on the fennel and maybe up the other bread spices, which didn't come through too much (maybe a tsp for 680g of flour and 50g rolled grains). There's always the next bake!
Sharing is caring. So for one of my holiday gifts this year, I made some bread gifts for my family. Since I enjoy making nutritious bread, I made two loaves of naturally leavened 80% whole wheat along with a loaf of challah, just for good measure. Since I was traveling from Massachusetts to Colorado to see my folks, and thus unable to easily travel with my starter, I contacted one of my parent’s neighbors whom I am long time friends with. Luckily, they had a sourdough starter that I subsequently used for the bread. Why not commercial yeast, you may ask? Because sourdough is just so superior in taste, nutrition, satisfaction, etc. Need I go on? The scoring could have been a little prettier on the batard and boule since the cuts didn’t open to the extent I was looking for. Perhaps that could be solved with making the cuts deeper and longer? But I didn’t steam the oven so that could have contributed to lack in expansion. But now I am home and excited to try using lava rock for the first time. I am eager to compare rocks to my dutch oven and see how they compare. Overall though, I was very happy with how they turned out aesthetically, and they tasted pretty good too. It sure is nice when you can give bread as a gift and enjoy eating it too! Happy baking! -Rustic Rye
I am using organic rye seed to mill my own rye flour. The bread turned out to be a huge favorite over Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays. The only issue I had was that there was almost no rye taste to the bread. Even though every last crumb was eaten with gusto by the whole family, and people were left looking for more bread, both my father and myself expect a very strong rye taste when it comes to rye bread; otherwise I may as well make plain sourdogh white and or whole wheat bread. How do I impart a stronger rye taste? My recipe is as follows: 2 cups rye starter (made by allowing equal parts water and self milled organic rye flour to Ferment). Add 6 cups self milled organic rye flour. Add 2 eggs. Add equal parts water and heavy whipping cream until dough is kneadable. Combine 1teaspoon Himalayan pink salt An envelope of yeast if needed or if you like the flavor baker's yeast. Allow first rise for 4 hours knead down gently allow 2nd rise 2 to 4 hours. Bake at 350° for approximately 45 minutes to an hour. Serve with favorit bread condiment. Best when toasted. Please email suggestions to azreb9725@gmail.com
Stan's 100% rye crispbread. I like this one better than the 70% rye crispbread I made last year because it bakes faster, burns less, and is crispier. My son finished half sheet pan of crackers within an hour! My pasta maker was very efficient in producing crackers with even-thickness/thinness. Baked in a rush this time, so didn't make pretty shapes. Ordered some gadgets that hopefully will shape crispbread pretty. We'll see. Didn't I tell you I love coconut? I ate most of the macaroons here, in a day! So I had to re-bake for my son. For the birthday boy and his friend
Well to start with there are only 2 of them and there should be 3 of them But no one knows how they are made or what is in them so here goes. First make your own Clower Tortillas from the recipe on this site and cover them with Pepperjack cheese and melt it in the microwave Then make the chorizo from scratch.  Then fry it with white onion and potato and then fill the cheese tortillas with the mix. then roll them up and cover them with home made chorizo red sauce. Then cover the breakfast burritos in more cheese and melt it it in the MW too, also heating the filling again But then the real missing part of the first photo besides the skimpy number of burritos comes to life.  Get the green garnishes ready, lime wedges, chopped green onion, sliced avocado and cilantro. But we are not done oh no!  You have to get some crema and even more sauce ready to put on top too. And there you go OOOpppssss! it is still totally naked!  Now, like any Mexican dish. you can put an egg on top to finish it off but in the morning it is a requirement for a breakfast burrito! and Lucy always reminds us to never for get that salad for lunch after breakfast!
Hubby has been asking for a light rye so I checked out my fridge and found some rye flakes that had been there for a while. I also have 25 lbs of rye berries at my disposal so this what I came up with after searching the web and several bread books including Tartine 3. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Sprouts 60 g rye berries Porridge 56 g rye flakes 112 g water 30 g yogurt Main dough 100 g sifted Rye flour (120 g Rye berries) 100 g sifted Selkirk flour (115 g Selkirk berries) 100 g sifted Red Fife flour (115 g Red Fife berries) 690 g Unbleached flour 650 g water + 25 g 25 g salt 250 g Rye levain (125 g milled and sifted Rye berries, 125 g water - Procedure in recipe) Three days before: Morning or Mid day of the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day Once again, I am quite pleased with the shape and oven spring resulting from the method I am using. Dough making takes all day but it sure is worth it!
Greeting fellow bakers. I have not been here for a few months and am poorer for it. My baking was in a rut, so I came here for some inspiration and it paid off in spades. My first bake out of the rut was NY Style Deli rye from P. Reinhart's, "Bread Baker's Apprentice." This is one excellent sandwich bread and keeps well on the counter. I have been baking pulla religiously every couple of weeks and thought, why not use the pulla dough for babka? I rolled the dough out, brushed with melted butter being careful to leave about a 3/4" border of plain dough. I then spead on a chocolate filling and sprinkled with chopped hazelnuts, (filberts). Next, I rolled the dough into a tube and sealed the seam and rested in the fridge for a half hour or so. The theory is that makes the dough easier to work. I then cut the sough in half lengthwise and formed a crude braid, cut side up and placed it into the loaf pan to proof. Baked at 350F with steam for 20 minutes and a further 35 minutes to finish. Delicious!
long-time lurker first-time poster here. I've learned so much from so many folks on here finally had to sign up and join in on the fun worlds colliding with this purpley kombucha barley sourdough bread more specifically, ~2 cups of grape and pear mash from a secondary kombucha fermentation (along with lots of the probiotastic bacteria and yeasties) mixed with a whole wheat levain and a final dough approximately 60% whole wheat and 25% barley. rolled in wheat germ pre-bake. very pleased with the results altho definitely lots to tinker with this first of many future experiments. also very cool to find another use for the fermented fruit besides feeding the compost pile!
It's about to get real chilly here on Long Island tomorrow.  They're predicting the temperature to go down into the low teens, so what better bread to eat with a bowl of hot soup than a nice hearty 50+ percent rye bread. This one has beer in the main dough which always adds a great flavor to rye bread.  The sour cream in the porridge adds extra moisture and really made this bake perfect.  The rye flavor really does come through so if you are not a fan of rye this is not the bread for you. Mr. Frog is not having much luck fishing in his frozen pond :). Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the water called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients as well as the sour cream in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the liquid is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the water and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the beer for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, olive oil and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 550 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Having successfully followed Abe's advice and restricted the cold retard to just the bulk fermentation, the next step seemed to figure out the best way to score for optimal rise/bloom/oven spring. This was basically a rerun of the previous bake, except that the add-ins were ground dried clementine peel and poppy seeds, as well as the multi-grain scald. I started off by blowing the pre-shape, rolled them into logs, rather than boules, which was my intent. Anyway, what is it about the shaping on the first loaf that just doesn't seem to go right? I know I'm not supposed to, but the first batard didn't feel like it had enough tension, so I patted it back out and did it over.  Having rectified my error, I let the two boules bench rest for 30 minutes. And, I finally remembered to hunt down a "small, clear, straight-sided container" so I could really try judge the final proof, rather than just winging it. I deliberately set it out on the bench before dividing and weighing so I would make sure to take some off and stuff it in the container. Well, obviously it was so clear, that I forgot it -- just didn't see it, didn't even remember until after I'd scored the loaves. Mmmph. Next time. I got the impression that the "letter-folded" loaves rose more uniformly than the "backward crossant" one, so this time I shaped both in the letter-fold fashion and scored them differently. So, the loaf on the left was the first one -- bungled pre-shape, twice-shaped and scored with two parallel cuts along the axis of the loaf. The second one was scored on the diagonal, possibly not as deeply as the first one -- I'm still having trouble judging the depth as I cut. Well, is the mess on the left-hand loaf from bad shaping, or did I score too deeply and too far towards the end of the loaf? I guess the only way is to shape and score the next two loaves in exactly the same fashion, and see if I get exactly the same results. I'm willing to bet I won't :-D Update: crumb shot Thoughtfully provided (with a little prompting from granny) by grandson. This is the loaf on the left, with bad pre-shape and wonky scores, but the cross-section looks okay to me. Crumb isn't too dense, for which I'm thankful. The saga continues…
The Lucy is u to her latest lay hack that puts her other lazy hack's like NMNF starter to shame.  This time she didn't even make any dough at all and claimed victory,  No smoked meats or veggies either but at least she got pepperonis on some of them this time. she had me make a batch of pizza sauce just like always but lazy loafer didn't specify fire roasted tomatoes this time either.  Pizza sauce isn't like other sauces Italian sauces around here.  It has more red wine, moire garlic and way more Italian herbs and hot chili flakes to make it spicy as all get out. She didn't specify fresh mozzarella either foe some reason.  She said she didn't because I was too lazy to go to the tore which was totally wrong on several levels like the Chiefs play the Evil Empire. She didn't make 2 -14" pies for the 3 of us this time but instead made 5 of the tiniest ,individual pies where you could ;ad 4 of them onto the oven stone with the peel at one time!  Talk about lazy, she used store bought tortillas !for the crust - such sacrilege! I had to make the salad too! We did grill the onions and the Italian sausage and chopped up a couple of mushrooms and a bit of yellow bell pepper and snipped of a bunch of fresh basil from the bush growing n the back yard but she just watched me do that of course  so we is pretty liberally used here. Both has sauce, mozzarella and Pecorino Romano gated on top with basil garnish bit the sausage ones had yellow peppers and the pepperoni had the mushrooms.  I have to say that the crust came out tasty, not burned on the bottom after 10 minutes at 500 F and crispy too with no folding and crunchy.  Makes me not want to ever make pizza dough again
~25% whole wheat sourdough with the last of frozen homemade tomato sauce from the summer to welcome back wifey from a meditation retreat I like to try many different pizza dough recipes but always come back to this one. does anyone have one they like better for home oven pizza making??
Hi everyone, I have been sourdoughing for years, after looking at commercially available small flour mills for a long time and seeing the downfalls and cost of everything I found I decided to build my own 300mm stone ground mill. I am now looking for ancient wheat grains that I can mill and make bread. Does anyone know where I can aquire this. Hopefully direct from farmer  I am looking at 100kg for a start. Thank you in advance
I recently took out Martin Philip's Breaking Bread from the library, and this is the first recipe I've tried from it. It's 50% whole wheat (home milled), and has oats, millet, and sunflower seeds. It was a tasty loaf. My short list of recipes to try next from the book are his boiled cider rye bread, beekeeper's pain de mie, and Irish levain. Has anybody tried anything from this book yet?
I have been milling my own flour on a blender which is coarser than commercial flour. Following the suggestion from Dabrownman, Danni and others, I have sifted the flour and used the bran and large bits to build up the levain. First I soaked the bran for 2 days and left in the fridge to soften up before building the levain. I do not have precise measurements, but the approximate quantities are: Levain 25 g bran 30 g starter 30 g bread flour 80 g water Dough 110 g fresh milled flour (whole wheat + rye) 120 g bread flour 130 g water 70% hydration (felt like 75% when handling the dough) Following standard steps, dissolved the levain first and added the dry ingredients, 4 g salt, a dash of honey and a dash of olive oil. No autolyse, 3 stretches and folds in the bowl, 5 hours bulk fermentation, shaped and straight into the fridge for 4 hours. Baked from fridge in a cold pot and cold oven for 55 min at 230C. I can tell that I experienced the best aromas ever when baking. The levain also had a sweet and nutty smell because of the bran. Tasting this morning, the crumb revealed softness, nicely aerated, and nutty. I also got a nice oven spring, which I think has to do with the bran levain since it looked more active than normal. Overall it has been a great experience worth while repeating whenever I mill my own flour. Happy baking to ALL
I baked a half batch of bagels this morning following Peter Reinhart's recipe fro "Artisan Breads Every Day." Boy did they ever turn out good! I should have made a full batch. It was my first time attempting bagels and this recipe will definitely be a regular in my baking rotation. I enjoyed my first home baked bagel for a late breakfast with cream cheese. Now I need to go out and find some lox! Happy baking! Ski
I found with my last bake, that by coating the dough with melted butter, then the chocolate filling, that as the dough rose in the proof and baking stages, it squeezed most of the chocolate to the top of the loaf. With version II, I omitted the melted butter and think it bonded better to the dough and this version has more veins of chocolate than the first bake. I also used a little more than half a batch of pulla dough and found 525 grams properly filled the loaf pan. Pulla is a dough enriched with milk, sugar, eggs and cardamom. Baked at 350F for 15 minutes with steam and another 20 minutes no steam. I forgot to add chopped nuts this time and will do so next time. This loaf is pretty decadent and sweet, but it goes great with really strong coffee -- espresso from my little Bialetti espresso maker! Happy baking Fresh Loaf friends! Ski
I had some left over milled grain flour sitting in the fridge.   Need a brown bread!So I started off weighing flour to see what sized loaf, the plan was for 600 g 1:2:39 gm kamut45 g spelt93 g whole wheat30 g ryeok,  need to make a bigger loaf than planned as I want whole grain below 50% and I had just enough levain ready to go.  So I added 217 g bread flour and 6 g gluten flour, autolysed with 245 g water and 21 g yeast water (warmed up from fridge) for 45 minutes.  Then added 133 g levain ( 100% hydration) and. did 100 SLAFs.  Added the 7.2 g salt + another 10 g yeast water. after another 105 SLAF I left the dough to bulk ferment. 4 sets of coil/ stretch & fold were done (dough was a a bit firm for the coils but I didn't want to increase hydration further. 3 hours after finishing the SLAFs I preshaped dough, rested 30 minutes then shaped and retarded over night in banneton in the fridge.  Nicely risen this morning and baked at 240°C in DO for 15 mins lid on and 15 mins lid off.dough was lovely to work with although a little grainy from kamut. It held its shape well overnight although I did think it might overproof because of the yeast water.  Normally when I use YW I make a poolish but this time just added as part of the liquid.  Flavour is lovely, couldn’t resist some for lunch yesterday before it was sliced and frozen. So perhaps a little more open with the YW, not sure, but it is definitely not a dense or heavy loaf.  Positive outcome, I will add some YW more often I think.  It wasn’t a big percentage either.  Happy bakingLeslie
This was a repeat of this lovely bread, attempting to get more height and less spread.  http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/58551/oaty-sourdough.  I also wanted to see if there was a difference between my two starters. I scaled this to make just 1 smaller loaf.  The porridge was enough to make two lots of dough so I did a little experiment with my starters.  One I had converted to 60% hydration 3 weeks ago and it had been in the fridge all that time.  The other loaf used my standard 66% hydration starter that always lives in the fridge.  Both had been refreshed the day before and the l built a small 100% hydration starters in the evening with final build next morning using a bit of bran as part of the flour.  Levain matured for 7 - 8 hours before I used it.  Method was as my second attempt, with no lamination just coil folds. Dough hydration was 76% as opposed to 82% for the original.   The porridge also added to the hydration and I haven't calculated that.  The dough was very soft but manageable.  As I had to go out I popped the bulk fermenting dough in the fridge for about 3.5 hours. When I came home, I warmed it up for 30 minutes and this time did a preshape and rested 30 minutes before shaping.  It then had just over an hour on the bench before retarding over night. Baked at 240 deg C in two DOs at the same time for 15 mins lid on and 15 mins lid off. I thought the 60% hydration starter dough was a little less sticky and easier to handle but the 66% hydration starter loaf had slightly better volume. Is there a noticeable difference? in reality not much.  Flavour might be a tad different and I haven't checked that yet.  My crumb is no way as open as "fullproofbaking"  gets for this bread, but I am really happy with this bake. I will test my two starters again in a couple of weeks after they have been fed and left to see if the difference in hydration makes much difference in flavour. Leslie
It was time to clean out a few items from the pantry and the fridge. I found two kinds of feta, three kinds of olives, sun-dried tomatoes and roasted peppers, both in oil. So this recipe was created with the help of Cathy’s (nmygarden) recipe from last March. http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/55587/happy-baker A couple of things to note: The bran from the durum and the rye was soaked for a couple of days using some water from the main dough and  olive oil drained from the peppers and sun-dried tomatoes was added. Recipe Makes 3 loaves 300 g of durum berries 50 g of rye berries 700 g of unbleached flour 725 g of filtered water (divided into 675 g and 75 g) 10 g Old Bay seasoning 15 g Pink Himalayan salt 250 g levain (procedure is in recipe and will need additional wholewheat flour and unbleached flour) Add-ins 141 g of mixed olives (50 g Kalamata, 46 g Manzanilla and 45 g Black- sliced and pitted) 66 g Feta 42 g Sun-dried Tomatoes in oil 45 g Roasted yellow and red peppers in oil 25 g of oil from the sun-dried tomatoes and the roasted peppers Two nights before: The afternoon before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day I included a before and and an after proofing shot so they can be compared. This was after 9 hours. A small but definite rise.
I've been wanting to try baking these for quite some time now and finally managed to do it.  Unlike NY style bagels these are not boiled, but rather baked and dipped in a sweet pomegranate molasses and sesame seed mixture which gives these bagels a very unique flavor.  I converted a recipe using instant yeast to sourdough I found in The Palestinian Table by Reem Kassis. My mother starter is kept at 66% hydration so if yours is different you can adjust accordingly. I have never eaten the authentic Jerusalem Bagels so I have nothing to compare them to, but I do have to say they were pretty awesome especially eating one a few minutes after baking.  The sesame seed pomegranate topping mixture really gives these a unique flavor and they were also great the next day re-heated or toasted with some butter or cream cheese. Please note, the sesame topping amounts listed made almost double of what is needed for this amount of dough.  You can easily cut it in half unless you are making a larger amount of dough. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. For Topping:75 grams Sesame Seeds18 grams Pomegranate Molasses19 grams Hot Water Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the milk for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes.  Next add the levain, baking powder, sugar and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours (or 1 hour if using a proofer set at 78 degrees).  Prepare the topping while you are waiting for the dough to come to room temperature. Mix the seeds, pomegranate molasses with the hot water in a shallow baking dish that is around 1 1/2 qt/1,5L oval size or square.  Make sure the seeds are nice and damp but not clumpy.  You can add some more water if necessary. When the dough is ready, divide into 6 equal pieces and form each one into a ball.  Poke a hole through the middle and stretch the dough outward to create an oval ring about 6" long.  Try to use your fingers and make the whole as large as you can.  Let the bagels rest on a baking sheet with parchment paper for around 1 hour until they are getting nice and puffy. While they are resting, preheat your oven to 425 degrees Fahrenheit. When ready to bake, dip each bagel into the seed mixture and press top of each so they stick and cover the entire surface.  Try to pull the dough a bit more and make the hole larger if possible.  Place the bagels onto the baking sheet and let them rest for around 15-20 minutes.  The original recipe did not use any steam, but I always like to, and recommend you do the same. Bake the bagels with steam, for 15-20 minutes until they are nice and brown.  Remove the and place on a cooling rack.  Eat them when they are still warm and enjoy!
This week I decided to wing it somewhat, a departure for me. I made a dough I’ve made often before - 30% whole wheat, 79% hydration, 12% levain - and added a soaker of a small handful each of sesame, flax, chia, pumpkin, and sunflower seeds. I didn’t weigh the seeds or water in the soaker because I knew it would be a much higher percentage of the dough weight than much I was taught to use. My bad! I’ll have to experiment to recreate it to get the wonderful aroma and flavor. The dry seeds were probably around 30% or more of the dough weight. When I make seeded breads I always have trouble with the scoring because the seeds prevent a clean cut. These loaves opened nicely on one of the 4 cuts, and verged into blowout territory in spots, while the other cuts nearly disappeared! Pretty happy with the crumb for so many seeds, and as it turns out a good warmup for next week and the community bake. Tom
The various Rosellas in our garden loves eating the lavender seeds, sometimes daintily holding it with their feet while eating. It served as my inspiration for bread this week. Lavender makes me think of France, so voila, Lavender Fougasse! The lavender flavour is very strong, so I used only a sprinkle and combined it with rosemary and orange thyme. I used my wheat sourdough starter for this one.
I'd mentioned to Abe that I was thinking of rosemary and onion for my next bake (working on shaping and scoring) and he came back with a suggestion for this lovely recipe for tomato bread by Emmanuel Hadjiandreou. Of course, why not? The first surprising thing was the quantity of levain: 300g of 100% levain for 400g of flour! And since I wanted two 700g-ish loaves, I found myself building 450g of levain over the course of two days, after which I left it to retard in the fridge. And a loaf with no whole grain (except the rye culture)? Eek. The next disconcerting thing was giving up my recently adopted "best" practices: adding a soake;, overnight cold bulk; preshape and bench rest. But Abe encouraged me to follow the recipe as written, at least the first time out, before I started in with my sometimes ill-advised tweaking. So I did. Most of the way. I did, however, have to cheat the bulk fermentation slightly. Being the star of time management that I am, I found myself in the position of either shortening the bulk by 15 minutes or letting it go until after dinner, which would have been way too long, unless I stuck the dough in the fridge early enough. Which I didn't, since the aim was to follow the recipe to the letter. Since there was neither pre-shape nor bench rest, the shaping of the slightly underfermented dough was a tad on the sticky side, but nothing unmanageable. Thanks to the "small, clear, straight-sided container" with a wad of dough in it, I did let the loaves proof longer thann I would have done if I were just relying on the poke test. Baked as per the recipe, and the kitchen smelled wonderful. I should also mention that the dough took on the most beautiful color from the tomato paste. Loaves are flatter than I hoped (so what else is new?); whether that's due to the shortened bulk or the not-tight-enough shaping (or the relationship between them) will be tested out on the next bake. The taste is wonderful; we had it with some fresh goat cheese, and I just got home from work and ate a slice toasted, with nothing on it. Crumb is soft, crust is crisp, color is so much fun to wake up to! Toast! I'll definitely make this one again, although I will want to ramp up the proportion of nigella seeds -- and do the pre-shape and bench rest. Thank you, Abe We did bake this one "together", and of course your loaf looks so much nicer, with that lovely round cross section and yummy crumb. Thanks again for pointing me in the direction of this loaf.
Artisan Bread School is running the following courses: Winnipeg, Canada 1 - 5 April 2019 COURSE FULL Fattoria degli Usignoli, Tuscany, Italy 6 -10 May 2019 PLACES AVAILABLE https://www.artisan-bread-school.com/course/five-day-course-at-fattoria-degli-usignoli-italy-may-2019/ Fattoria degli Usignoli, Tuscany, Italy 14 - 18 May 2019 COURSE FULL Ladysmith, British Colombia, Canada, 24 - 28 June 2019 PLACES AVAILABLE https://www.artisan-bread-school.com/course/five-day-course-in-ladysmith-canada-june-2019/ Foster's Mill, Cambridgeshire, UK 27 - 28 July 2019 COURSE FULL Lynam, Maine, USA 21 - 25 October 2019 PLACES AVAILABLE https://www.artisan-bread-school.com/course/five-day-course-in-lyman-maine-october-2019/
Kalamata Olive and Asiago Cheese sourdough , had a nice taste
Now that I have discovered a good source of Montreal smoked meat in town, I determined to do the deli rye from Peter Reinhart's, "Bread Baker's Apprentice." I have baked this recipe often, but this was the first time I built a fully rye starter. My previous starters were a wheat/rye mix. this time I starting from my mother, I fed with rye flour four times over three days and for the fourth and final feed added the sauteed yellow onions. After a few hours it was time to mix and bake. I proofed the loaf seam side down in a round banneton and baked seam side up. The way the loaf kind of blew apart on top points to some deficiency in my seam sealing. As always this is a work in progress, stepping back to a method of baking I haven't done in two or so years. Starting the oven at 400F, I then turned the oven down to 375F for 20 minutes with steam and finished at 350F for 20 minutes no steam. The resulting loaf was delicious with a soft crumb. Perfect for pile it on smoked meat sandwiches! Though I halved Peter's original recipe, I ended up using a higher percentage of starter than the original -- 180 vs 164 grams. The only thing I would change next time I bake this is to make sure the onions are cut to a uniformly small dice. A little sloppy on my dicing, I had a few more larger chunks than I would like. Great recipe GREAT bread! Happy baking, Ski
This is the most amazing bread I have ever created. I used a banana bread recipe for the base. The original is on Perfect Sourdough Teresa L Greenway’s Facebook site. I had previously made her formula. In an effort to clear out my pantry I decided to incorporate new fruits but keep the other essentially the same. I have canned green Victoria rhubarb from a friend in Wisconsin. I used applesauce that I made from wild apples I picked. I created enough bubbly levain to double the formula making 4– 8x4 loaf pans. The original recipe as published by Teresa calls for discard. I don’t keep any so I made 740 g of bubbly levain!! I drained the rhubarb and boiled the syrup down and basted the hot loaves with it. The flavorings are cardamom and diced candied ginger. All I can say is wow! Amazing. I leave this batter to rise in a warm place for 2 hrs. I find it really makes a wonderful difference in the breads texture. You can see the incredible oven spring. If you join/search  Perfect Sourdough you can see the post and get the links for the details.
From How to Make Bread by E. Hadjiandreou 79% hydration 4 pull and fold style kneads, 10 minutes apart overnight rest in fridge (12 hours) 2 hours on counter to come to room temp before shaping proof in round banneton 2 hours at 75 degrees-ish (oven with periodic blasts of bread proof setting) at 2 hours started preheating oven to 500, pressing finger slightly into dough mostly springs back, if i push it in real deep it springs back mostly, but leaves indent, so i'm hoping that's the right level of proofing preheat stone for 30min did two slashes at an ear-encouraging angle used half-sheet pan under baking stone, poured one cup water in as i added bread, then another cup about 15 minutes in baked for 30 minutes Results: looks nice, but the slashes didn't really open up much, it kind of bulged like a mylar balloon instead of keeping the nice round shape it had coming out of the banneton, so I'm still having issues with the bottom crust browning enough and there being enough opening from the slashes. My knife may be too dull, or it could be steam. I think next time i'll try the soaked rags method. Also plan to order a lame soon.
I needed to refresh two starters, a whole wheat and a rye, and being a positively parsimonious sort of fellow I was reluctant to send 200g of perfectly good starter down the drain. I also needed a new loaf of sandwich bread. What to do? Oh, what to do? Well, I did a discard loaf. In all fairness I should at this point provide a 'trigger warning' for sensitive sourdough folks. I did use some IDY. However, I offer in mitigation the fact that all flour used in the loaf and the starters was whole grain and home milled. Another trigger warning for the 'hands on' folks is in order. A 20-year-old KA mixer was involved. In mitigation I offer the fact that the loaf is 30% whole rye and throw myself on the mercy of the court. The starters, one made from whole hard white wheat and the other whole rye and weighing 200g each were pulled out of the fridge while the water for my coffee was coming to a boil. A couple of hours later they were close to room temp and after stirring them down I spooned out 100g from each and mixed the discards together in a small bowl. While they were getting re-acquainted (they're distant cousins) I milled an additional 100g of rye and 300g of hard white wheat into the KA's bowl and added 1/4 tsp of Ascorbic acid. Using the paddle I mixed the flours and the Ascorbic together and then slowly drizzled in 260g of warmed, filtered water. At that point I was exhausted and took a 30 minute coffee break. Thoroughly re-invigorated at the end of my break I used the paddle to mix in 30g of honey and, when it was integrated, the 200g of discarded starters. Because it was break time I poured another cup of coffee and put my feet up (actually my feet stayed on the floor and I sat my butt down). Break over I sprinkled 1 tsp of IDY on the dough, rolled up my sleeves (catching a cuff on the dough hook can have serious consequences) and proceeded to knead in the yeast and work up a cohesive dough that would hang together on the hook. Then it was the dough's turn to rest for 10 minutes. Just so it wouldn't get bored I sprinkled on 9g of Pink Himalayan Salt. When that break was over the dough once again waltzed with the hook while the salt chaperoned. Just before the ball was over I mixed in 20g of ghee. When the dough had almost doubled I shaped with a few stretches and a roll (on the cutting board - not in the hay), plopped it into my 4x4x9 Pullman pan and took another break. The pan was lidded when the highest part of the proofed loaf was even with the upper rim of the pan and placed into a cold oven set to 350f. Thirty-six minutes later the lid came off and the loaf spent 10 minutes picking up a light tan.
I have been meaning to sprout some flour again and finally got around to doing it.  Boy am I glad I did!  The unique flavor from using freshly ground sprouted flour is amazing. I made 1 big loaf and about 5 rolls which I ended up eating in 2 days 😬.  I do have to say the rolls were probably some of the best ones I have made to date.  The combo of rice, potatoes and sprouted flour made them nice and soft and full of so much flavor.  I am going to make another batch of just rolls next time and freeze them for later use so I don't eat all of them right away! If you don't have Kamut to sprout you can use Durum which would be just as good.  I used some Organic Jade Pearl Rice I bought at Whole Foods.  The uncooked rice is very unique and looks like little green shards of jade and has a very mellow pleasant taste.  If I didn't tell you there was rice in the bread you would never know, but it does help add another layer of flavor and texture.  You can certainly use any style of rice you have on hand and it should be just as good. Formula Download the BreadStorm File Here Levain Directions Mix all the Levain ingredients together for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled. Either use in the main dough immediately or refrigerate for up to 1 day before using. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours and cooked rice together in your mixer or by hand along with 385 grams of the water, until it just starts to come together, maybe about 1 minute.  Let it rest in your work bowl covered for 30 minutes or longer.  Next add the salt, starter (cut into about 7-8 pieces), olive oil, potatoes and the balance of the water and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours (If you use a proofer set to 78 degrees you can finish in about 1.5 hours). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1  hour.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.   Place your dough into your proofing basket(s) and cover with a moist tea towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 545 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 2 minutes lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Hello TFLers! I've been very busy this early in 2019, I almost have no time to post and check TFL. I'm glad I had a little time to post this. I baked this early this January but I'm only posting it now because, you know, teachers have a lot of paperwork aside from actual classroom teaching.This bread was inspired by NYC.This is a remake of my Potato Onion Sourdough "Bagel-Crust" Squares but with minor differences; the inspiration came from Knishes which are also very famous in NY. In addition to baking it in an oven, I used sauteed onions instead of dehydrated onions which is how filling for knishes is commonly done.I also added lots of freshly ground black pepper. Potato, onion, pepper; you know it's going to be delicious. It was so fragrant from the pepper.Black pepper here as it clumped in one area of the raw bagel. I love how it looks.I dunked half of them in black sesame seeds on both sides after boiling because I love a bagel with sesame like last time and its look.I cut some into "squares"  just like last time because I just can't enough of it. :)The ones without seeds stuck to the parchment paper. What if I want to make plain ones? Anyone who knows how to deal with this? The crumb. Potato really makes a huge difference.Eat with a thick schmear of cream cheese.My "schmearing skills" are not on point so it was not thick. No problem, dunk every bite in extra cream cheese!Pardon the messy look of the following pictures. Cream cheese almost everywhere. :) The crust was crispy and a little delicate that only boiled bagels can have. The crumb was softer than a plain bagel but chewier and tighter than my previous version. If you look at the crumb on my previous post you can see that it was a lot more open and softer, it was also moister probably due to the shape. The flavor was almost the same as I remember, like a good pizza with tang from the sourdough and sweetness from the sauteed onions but I like this one more because of the heat and fragrance of the black pepper. Really really good with the cream cheese!-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------I also made some wickedly good Chocolate Chip Cookies just like how a famous bakery in New York does it: gigantic and half-baked. It told you, I'm bringing a taste of NYC in our home. I used the best chocolate I can find because it is half the cookie. It's my first time to make cookies and I did not expect they would be that good.How huge are they? They're as big as or even a touch bigger than my palm.Look at the melty pockets of chocolate amidst the half baked dough with 3 perfect layers; a crispy craggly outer layer, a chewy middle layer; and a thick soft gooey center. Sorry if it was out of focus. I was in a hurry because I can't wait to eat it. :)Perfect with a cold glass of milk. Enjoy!
This morning I baked my version of Hamelman's 5-grain Levain. I think this is one of the best breads in Hamelman's book - it is tasty, it is easy to make, and it never fails. Needless to say, I make hardly any changes to the original recipe. Some of the details of my version are: Some photos showing the progress of the bake follow. Cracked Rye before soaking                                    Levain after about 12 hours Soaker after about 12 hours                                         Dough after mixing Divided and preshaped                                         Final shaping into logs On parchment and into a bag for retarding                   After 18 hours refrigerated retard Three shallow diagonal scores                                       During the steaming The final product Thanks @DanAyo for setting this up! -Brad
I have been dipping my toes into breads with added goodies recently. My favorite part of bread with goodies is biting into a slice and getting a little surprise of olives/raisins/nuts/ etc. I think it adds a nice textural variance to the bread. I haven't made a loaf with olives yet, so when I found this recipe in Hammelman's Bread and had to give it a try. The loaves are about 65% hydration, 20% olives, 10% whole wheat, and naturally leavened. I ended up making a fougasse and a batard. Please excuse the large chunk of fougasse missing here. I couldn't resist. :) I have a few take aways that might help YOU in your next baking endeavor: 1. I did not develop sufficient dough strength since the batard spread out all over the baking stone and didn't have much rise. I either needed to slap and fold more after mixing or get more stretch and folds in during the bulk ferment. 2. Cutting the fougasse before baking needs to be done on parchment paper before loading onto the hot baking stone. Then baking it just enough to make it crispy, but still soft inside. Texture is everything here. 3. Cut the olives in half but keep the large chunks since those are great to bite into. Next time, I would like to add some garlic and ground pepper for more flavor. Happy baking. -Rustic Rye
I began browsing the fresh loaf mid 2009, when I was trying to learn how to bake proper bread. Over the years the suggestions, advice, support and references have taught me much about baking bread. I enjoy the breads I bake. Perhaps the best early advice I adopted was from a poster who suggested that if you can buy your flour from your local artisan baker do so. I have done so ever since, in Canmore and now in Golden where I just bought my second bag of bread flour from our local bakery. Now I bake pulla about every 10 days to two weeks, but the starter loaf I mixed Tuesday with the new batch of flour resulted in more oven spring than I have ever seen. Mind you the pulla loaf I baked 2 weeks ago was with 5 month old flour, but holy cow I have never seen such oven spring before! The result was a nice loose crumb, great flavour and eat ablility! The dark on the crust is from the granulated sugar I generously sprinkled on the egg wash coating prior to baking. There is much to be said for an active, well fed starter, but I think the real hero here is the flour. the owner and head baker of this 50 year old family run bakery has been buying flour from the same southern Alberta mill near Lethbridge since the bakery opened. I feel blessed to be able to bake with such a good flour and have been loving the results! Happy baking! Ski PS anyone wants the recipe, please just ask and I will post it in the comments.
I've been baking recipes from Martin Philip's Breaking Bread recently, and this is based on his recipe for Pane di Genzano. I have a small container of black garlic that somebody gave me, which was just sitting in the fridge, so I added some to the dough at around 4.5%. I also didn't have wheat bran, so I sifted some whole rye flour and used rye bran to coat the boules. I know that I should have left the breads in the oven longer to get darker, as is traditional, but my instinct made me remove them at this level of brownness. If I make them again, I'll try to get them darker. The bread was relatively simple to make, and had a great texture (very soft crumb), but I was not particularly impressed with the flavor-- it lacked the depth that I've come to expect from good sourdough breads. I was worried that I had put too much black garlic in, but the flavor was actually very subtle, and it possibly would have benefited from a little more garlic (or maybe a combo of roasted garlic & black garlic?). Here's the crumb:
Hello- My sourdough starter (KA unbleached white bread flour and water 100% hydration) is now about 3 weeks old.  It rises very well after every feeding, at least double sometimes more, but my bubbles are not real big, there are a lot of them but they are fairly small. Is that ok?  I keep the starter on the counter at room temp which fluctuates between 65-71 F I have not baked with it yet, but plan too soon.
recipe by Emmanuel Hadjiandreou's book.  Inspired by Abe & Carole I had a go at this yesterday whilst making my 5 grain levain for the community bake. Starter was refreshed the day before and in the evening I built the levain - 100% hydration with some bran included and left it overnight on the bench. Bake day was crazy - visitors in and out and bread on the go. Mixed together 237 g flour & 6 g salt.  then I added 4 g nigella seed and went to get the celery seeds.  Oops, it is mustard seed.  What to do?  ok I have oregano (only 1 g as plant is tiny) and there was rosemary in the garden.  So I added 1 g finely chopped oregano and 1 g finely chopped rosemary.  Mixed with flour until well distributed. This is just another small  575 g loaf. Mixed together 24 g tomato paste (home made so not as strong as commercially made stuff), 6 g olive oil, 119 g water and 178 g levain.  To this I added the flour mix....  and mixed well.  Hadjiandreou mixes then rests 10 minutes, then does a series of folds at 10 minute intervals.  I decided to just do my usual 200 slap and folds to make sure I had enough gluten development.  I gave the dough 2 sets of stretch and folds 45 minutes apart.  At this point I decided I should follow instruction which had said bulk ferment 1 hour, shape and proof 3 - 6 hours.  So I patted dough out it was a little poofy, so I folded sides to centre and rolled it up, popped in the banneton to proof An hour and a half later it was like this so I popped it in the fridge.  I wanted to bake it when I baked the 5 grain levain later in the day.  It was also fermenting much quicker than I expected. An hour and a half later I turned the oven on, put the DOs in and left to preheat for an hour.  Here it is before I scored - a nice dough, hasn't spread much.  Not sure if it would have been better baked a little earlier though. So this was baked at 260 deg C for 15 minutes, then 15 minutes lid off at 225 deg C.  Don't seem to be able to get an ear at the moment :(   Still it baked up fine although I think there is now a hot spot in my oven. Crumb shot the colour is pretty true too.  An interesting flavour, had for lunch today with cold cuts and brie.  Not sure if it is the oregano or the rosemary coming through. A good bake though, I will see how I feel about the flavour as I eat it and make adjustments then.  The celery seed would give a different flavour I think. Leslie
I had some leftover 125% Levain from Hamelman’s 5 Grain Levain (or 8 grain in my case) and I didn’t want to throw it out. I figured out a quick 1-2-3 recipe but the amount came out to be too much for my batard banneton. So what to do? I could use my bigger round bannetons but that means that I have to dig out my larger cast iron pots to bake the loaves and just didn’t feel like doing that. So I thought that I’ll use a loaf pan. Thanks to Dabrownman posts on figuring out how much dough to fill loaf pans, I calculated how much more flour and water I needed to add to my 1-2-3 recipe to fill 2 loaf pans. I kept the recipe basic (flour, water, salt) so that my daughter could eat it on her very strict diet. I didn’t sift out the bran, just milled the flour and made dough with it. Note that I didn’t measure the individual grains. I just kept adding various grains until I had 490 grams. I know I put a fair bit of Kamut in there and lesser amounts of rye and Einkorn. Recipe Makes two 9” x  5” pan loaves 230 g of 125% hydration levain 490 g freshly milled whole grain flour (Kamut, Spelt, Rye, Einkorn) 359 g Unbleached flour 500 g water + about a handful 20 g salt And we were very bad! We tried to wait to cut the loaf  but that lasted all of 5 minutes, if that! Nothing like warm bread with butter and homemade jam! The crust is very thin and crispy. Crumb is tender and delicious. Not bad for a spur of the moment loaf.
Yes, I know it is supposed to be a 5 grain levain but I wanted to add a variety of grains and seeds, and since we are pretty flexible with the rules, I used 8 grains (counting flax and oats as grains) and 2 types of seeds. I also adjusted the hydration upwards to be able to mix the flour, water, Levain part of the dough and then add the seed soaker at the end of the mixing time in a KitchenAid mixer. I also always make a bit more levain due to  loss from being stuck to the walls of the container so that’s why I am starting with 70 g rather than 45. To account for this extra starter, I let it rise on the counter (a cool 70 F) for only 11 hours rather than the 12-16 as stated in the original recipe. This recipe is scaled to make three 875 g loaves before baking. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Soaker: 100 g cracked rye berries (coarsely mill 100 g of rye berries) 86 g raw sunflower seeds 86 g old fashioned oats (large flake) 25 g black sesame seeds 75 g flax seeds (freshly ground) 7 g salt 448 g boiling water Levain: 70 g starter (2 stage refreshment procedure in recipe) 275 g strong baker’s unbleached flour 345 g filtered water Dough: 550 g strong baker’s unbleached flour 50 g high extraction Spelt flour (mill and sift 60 g of Spelt berries) 50 g high extraction Kamut flour (mill and sift 60 g of Kamut berries) 50 g high extraction Einkorn flour (mill and sift 60 g of Einkorn berries) 50 g high extraction Rye flour (mill and sift 60 g of Rye berries) 77 g high extraction Durum flour (mill and sift 90 g of Durum berries) 30 g plain yogurt from the local dairy 330 g filtered water 21 g Pink Himalayan salt Two days before: The morning of the day before: The evening the day before: Dough making day: Baking I think my loaves might have been slightly underproofed since I got pretty explosive oven spring.
The purpose of this post is to reinforce that folks shouldn't just assume one levain will act like all, or even any other differing hydration or composition levain. During the current Community Bake of the Hamelman Five-Grain Levain, Designing Woman (Carole) expressed concerns about building her 1st very liquid levain.  I’d pointed her to a post of mine from two years ago which spelled out what to expect, as results from feedings and builds will vary.  I haven’t baked anything in almost a month (freezer inventory and a bit of dieting) and was itching to get a new bake started.  So I thought that I’d document the following while building my levain. Just for fun, if you want to call it that, I keep a few different levains alive and happy in the depths of my refrigerator.  Among them are: For those who think that you can’t keep a liquid levain alive without a frequent refresh, here is proof that you can, as it was 5 weeks without a refresh for the 100%, and it is still quite alive and at my service. Lined up for each build as: 100% AP, 125% AP and 125% rye. 1st Build: 2nd Build: Notes: The 1st build: The 2nd build: Conclusions: None of this surprised me as I’ve performed these builds many times before.  Rather it demonstrates that each differing hydration and flour content will yield differing results from refreshes and builds. Now it may be out there and well documented elsewhere.  But generally I find write-ups in most formula notes to frequently be lacking, in whole or in part, in certain criteria, such as: All of these are helpful, at least to me, and as valuable to my experience as the baker as just about any other notations in a given formula.  Well, anyway, that is my personal take. alan
I was in a big-box food-service warehouse, and picked up a big bag of Grain Craft Power Flour ($11/25 lb). It is a commercial pizza flour, and I was aiming to increase the amount of whole grain flour/meal in my PdC without compromising volume. Another option would have been to add vital wheat gluten, but the pizza flour is easier, and we sometimes like commercial style pizza and bagels. The conventional wisdom for Power Flour is that it wants a lot of mixing. Would it work with "sour dough" and less mixing?, e.g., mixing by hand? (Real sourdough is a powerful dough conditioner, and we can use fineness to avoid work.) Current practice is to keep a sourdough starter of 100 gr of fresh ground grain hydrated with 66 gr of  water in  the fridge.  The evening before a bake, that gets dumped into 200 grams of fresh ground grain with 400 gr water, mixed and left on the counter overnight.  The next morning, 400 gr Power flower mixed with 12 gr salt, is added by hand fulls to the dough and well stirred.   The last of the flour is kneaded in, the dough covered and left at room temperature for a couple of hours.  About 166 grams of dough is removed to the fridge to be the next starter.  After breakfast, the dough gets several "stretch and  folds" at 20 minute intervals. Then, the dough is left to ferment until after lunch.  The dough gets pre-shaped, rested, shaped, and put in lined baskets. The dough rises until a couple of hours before dinner, when it is baked and cooled in time for dinner.  If  the dough seems to be running behind schedule,  I will warm the oven a bit (e.g., 75F),  turn the oven off and leave the dough in the oven that is slightly warmer than the kitchen.  If the dough is running too fast, it goes in the fridge for a while. The wicker brotforms that I use help keep shaped loaves at a stable temperature during final rise. This all happens about every second or third day, unless I am making other kinds of bread.  This has become our staple bread, often embellished with dried fruit, nuts, or various seeds.  Some of the dough may be reserved back, rolled flat and baked into pita bread. Hydration is 66% and salt is 2%. The dough mix is 33% fresh ground whole grain and 66% bread flour. Usual kitchen temperature is around 66F - not unlike San Francisco.  That will change as the weather warms, and everything will have to go a bit faster. (I often use fresh ground flour that is warmer, so YMMV.) I do not put "yeast" in my PdC these days, but I do use commercial yeast 2 or 3 times per month, so I would be surprised if there is no commercial yeast in my starter.
the good and the U-G-L-Y my alibi is that the batard banneton didn't have a liner and the dough had mucho
Dan has organized another community extravaganza and already, there are some beautiful loaves posted. First build Thursday night; had lots of 100% hydration rye starter, so used that, which most certainly affected the finished loaves. Fed 12g at 1:2:2. Friday morning, realized that I was out of bulgur/buckwheat, which I'd meant to use in place of the cracked rye, which I can't find here (matter of fact, finding "cracked" anything is a bit of a challenge). So did the second build (1:1:1) and retarded it until I could get the marketing done. Made the soaker out of bulgur, flax and sunflower seeds and toasted multi-grain flakes (oat, barley, wheat, rye and rice). Didn't toast and/or grind any of the seeds. Measured out and whisked together flours and salt, measured out water (as usual, because of the difference between North American and French flours, 10% of the dough water was set aside), trying to organize a tidy mise en place. Did the final build of the levain (topping it up to get 340g of 125% BF levain). It was extremely soupy and a little nervous-making, despite what Alfanso's admonishments. After dinner, time to mix. Having read Dan mention wet dough and others talk about the diffiiculty of incorporating the soaker into the dough, I did something totally off the wall: dumped the soaker into the dry flour/salt mix, tossed that around and then added the levain, smooshed that around and then added the water. Dough was pretty stiff and I wound up adding, little by little, all of the reserved water. Tried to do SLAFs to make sure everything was well incorporated, but it felt like trying to slap and fold a roast beef. So resorted to pincering and folding as best I could, wetting my hands and bench all the while, because the dough felt really stiff. Over the course of the next two hours, did three or four STAFs on the bench -- dough was extremely stretchy but not at all elastic. Towards the end of the two hours, the dough began to feel almost workable, so into the fridge it went. The next day, got off to a later start than intended. Took the dough out of the fridge to warm up for a couple of hours then did a pre-shape, bench rest and shape (the recipe doesn't mention the first two -- were we supposed to go straight to shaping?) I made one loaf slightly smaller (by 30g) than the other. I did remember to pull off a bit to put into a small jar to keep an eye on the rise. To keep life interesting, I decided to try a new technique for the pumpkin seed coating. Rather than go through the business of rolling the loaves on a wet towel and dipping the loaves in a plateful of seeds, I tried just mildly spritzing above -- not at -- the loaves (anyone who's seen a hairdresser with a can of laquer will know what I mean), then carefully picking up the loaf with both hands and lowering the wet side down onto the seeds that were simply sprinkled onto the bench. Worked quite well! Oddly enough, the loaves rose pretty well in their baskets, but the bit in the jar didn't, and I was beginning to get antsy because I had a bird to roast and was going to need the oven. In retrospect, I could have stuck the loaves back into the fridge until the bird was done, but didn't think to do so at the time. So I scored and baked. Same old demon with lack of rise, but Danni and Kat have since brought up the fact that extravagant rise with this many seeds wouldn't have been possible anyway. The smaller, double-scored loaf rose rounder and higher than the single-score brother. Once again, I can't say if it's the scoring or the shaping that would account for that difference. Crust is thin and crisp, crumb is moist and soft and absolutely tasty. So, will be taking another shot at this soon, perhaps doing the whole shebang in one day. This is such a great place, so glad to have found it.
The full text of the recipe is here: https://www.theperfectloaf.com/beginners-sourdough-bread/ But, in summary: Note on scoring: it was far easier to score a loaf that came directly out of the fridge than the ones I have proofed in warmer temperatures. Tastes great! The first true "sour" loaf that i've gotten. I bought a loaf from Ken Forkish's bakery yesterday to compare and they are comparable (well, his is better, but mine's not bad!) Really happy with this. The big lessons I learned were Sourdough Starter feeding ratios (my original guessed-at ratio had too much mature starter), proofing in the fridge overnight, and the advantages of the dutch oven baking over the stone and steam.
I recently chanced upon an interesting recipe in the excellent Baecker Suepke's blog. It is for a Black Forest chocolate cherry sourdough bread. The Modernist Bread version springs to mind, but the Black Forest one is different - not sweet, apart from the cherries - and it has toasted sunflower and pumpkin seeds. I also added some non-salted pistachio seed, which gave a rather nice contrasting green colour. Interestingly, the recipe predates the Modernist Bread one by a couple of years. You can find the recipe HERE. It's in German, but translates successfully. There's also a variant recipe here which I didn't use, but it has a few different tweaks. The recipe is quite complex, with a soaker, a levain and an "aroma cook piece" (Aroma Kochstück) and various grades of wheat and rye meals. I approximated these with my Mockmill. The recipe also calls for light rye flour T997. I made this by putting wholegrain rye through a #50 sieve. Here's how the loaf looked after baking: And here's the crumb: The crumb and flavour remind me of a "pumpernickel on steroids". It really is bursting with flavour and I can recommend it to all who fancy an  interesting bake, albeit with some complexity. My favourite pairing was with some good French brie; I shall be baking it again! Lance
I have made a few iterations of a naturally leavened whole wheat loaf with nuts and seeds. This loaf was inspired by Maurizio's 50/50 loaf (theperfectloaf.com) but I took the liberty of adding some seeds. As for the flavor, I can't get enough of it. I will find any excuse to eat a slice; whether it's a seed butter and jelly sandwich, a soup accompaniment, or with avocado and egg, it's a real treat. Despite the high proportion of whole wheat, the crumb opened up wonderful for a light and airy loaf. I think this is my favorite loaf to date because it has so much flavor and I know it's fairly nutritious since it contains all the add ins - ground flax seed, rolled oats, and sunflower seeds. As my favorite British personality, Mary Barry, would exclaim, "it's just scrummy." I would also like to give a shout out to 88 Acres seed butter for the wonderful pictures and yummy spreads to enjoy with the bread. I have been enjoying their seed butter spreads to great delight. -Rustic Rye
Well folks, in an effort to continue to get my baking out of the rut it languished in for a year or so, I turned to Ken's book, "Flour, Water Salt and Yeast," for some inspiration. It had been a couple of years since I baked his breads or consulted his book. To be honest, I have never really enjoyed his breads. He uses a little whole wheat in every recipe and I cannot wrap my taste buds around the taste of whole wheat. Even buying the best whole meal, organic whole wheat flour, i am not liking the taste it gives to my breads. Now rye flour -- OH MY! Well I baked a loaf of this walnut bread and at first was not happy with the flavour. I then re-consulted the recipe and found that he enjoyed it toasted with butter and honey. I tried this way with blueberry, wildflower honey and liked the combination. While I will never be a fan of his bread formulas, I am a BIG fan of his technical approach to baking! Reading Forkish once again has rounded out my baking knowledge. His discussion on maintaining and modifying the flavour of a levain is priceless! Happy baking! Ski
And an experiment in scoring. Having fallen in love with the taste of this loaf and avidly read all the accounts of the different experiences with this bake, I was ready to take another shot at it. Abe had suggested in passing that I try baking three loaves, each with different scoring. Sure, why not? I decided this time, too, to try doing the whole procedure from mix to bake in the same day, rather than overnight retarding. Monday night Tuesday morning Tuesday night Wednesday mid-morning What is also interesting is that while they lost a bit of weight during baking (about 70g), the one that lost the least amount was the one in the middle. Now all I need to do is work some more on the shaping to get nice, round slices like Danny! Edit: Crumb shots Two loaves were given away and I kept and cut into the unscored one: Fortunately, I like the taste and crumb on this one. Shortly after taking these snaps, got into an argument with my mandoline slicer and won't be slapping or stretching or folding for a couple of days!
Same Day Pizza David Snyder February, 2019 When given a choice, I would always make pizza with dough leavened with sourdough. This could be a sourdough made with a three day lead time (See: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/34452/pizza-bliss) or even dough made with sourdough “discard.” (See: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/37179/pizza-made-sourdough-starter-discard) But, you know, sometimes I decide I want pizza for dinner tonight, not two or three days from now. I have found that the “Same-Day Straight Pizza Dough” formula from Ken Forkish's “Flour Water Salt Yeast” makes darn good pizza. You do have to decide on pizza for dinner tonight by 8 or 9 am in order to get the dough made and ready for a 7 or 8 pm dinner. I usually plan for it before I go to bed the night before. Note on quantities: These amounts of ingredients are for about 5 medium-sized pizzas. I usually scale the ingredients for 4 pizzas and actually make two pizzas and a quarter sheet pan of focaccia. Note on flours: This formula works well with a variety of flour blends. You can use AP or Bread Flour entirely. You can substitute whole wheat for some of the white flour. I have made this dough with Bread Flour and 00. I found the crust less crispy and more chewy than I prefer. I have made it with all 00 flour. The flavor was wonderful, but 00 is milled to work best in a real pizza oven that heats to 700ºF or even hotter. In my home electric convection oven, the best I can do is 500ºF convection bake. Pizza dough made with 100% Italian 00 flour does not brown well. So, a mix of AP and 00 flours is the best I have found to date, giving me great flavor and beautiful performance. Well, a little whole wheat flour doesn't hurt a bit. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % All purpose flour 350 35 Caputo 00 flour 650 65 Water (90-95ºF) 700 70 Instant yeast 2 0.2 Salt 20 2 Total 1722 172.2 Procedure Measure the yeast into a small bowl. Mix it with a couple tablespoons of the heated water and put it aside. In a large bowl, mix the flours. Add the rest of the heated water and mix to fully hydrate the flours. Cover the bowl and let it sit for 30 minutes to an hour. (Autolyse) Sprinkle the salt over the dough and scrape the dissolved yeast over the dough. Mix thoroughly. (I start by folding the dough over itself repeatedly with a silicon spatula, rotating the bowl 30º or so after each fold. I then squeeze the dough repeatedly with one hand, alternating squeezes with a series of stretch and folds. This both distributes the salt and yeast more evenly and develops the gluten further.) Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl. Allow the dough to ferment until almost double in volume (6-8 hours, depending on ambient temperature.) Do not under-ferment the dough. In this case, a bit over-fermented is better than under-fermented. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Divide the dough into pieces – 350g for 10inch pizzas; 700g or more for focaccia; etc. Form each piece into a tight ball. Flour lightly or oil lightly and refrigerate well-covered until 1-2 hours before use. They can be refrigerated until the next day, if desired. (Note: What I generally do is use a 1-quart Ziploc bag for each dough ball and spread a tablespoon or so of olive over the interior surfaces. Then I put a dough ball in each bag and refrigerate them, ideally for at least a couple of hours.) An hour or two before use, take the dough balls out of the refrigerator. Form each ball into a pizza shell by your method of choice. Top as desired and bake. (Note: I bake pizza on a pizza steel, preheated at 500ºF Convection for an hour. These pizzas baked in 8 minutes. Your time may vary depending on your oven.) Pizza shaped, topped and ready to bake Right out of the oven Cornicione crumb Enjoy! David
I first began baking these almond cookies the week before Christmas and every time I run out, I bake another batch. The recipe is from Penelope Casas' "The Foods and Wines of Spain." As the cookbook author says, she has been known to eat them by the dozen. These cookies are delicious and quite easy to make: 1 cup flour 3/4 cup ground almonds 1/2 cup sugar pinch salt 1/4 teaspoon cinnimon 1/4 pound or 1/2 cup lard or vegetable shortening 1 egg beaten Mix the dry ingredients and then cut in the shortening and egg. I used a pastry cutter and finished by hand. I used an ice cream scoop to size the cookies half round, then pressed them down in the centre with my thumb. Bake at 300F for 30 minutes until golden. Dust with powdered sugar. I forgot this last step which is optional in my books. Enjoy! Happy baking! Ski
The above is typical of my sour note experiments. Nice crumb, medium tightness. Golden color. Above is a typical example of my oven spring. I want more, a lot more. I want a bursting loaf, something that will rise so high that it scrapes the top of the oven. I have accomplished pretty much everything in a basic sour loaf except exceptional oven spring. Some things I have learned that have improved it are: I have used Raffa's Everyday Sourdough recipe consistently without much deviation. I also moved toward the The NMNF Starter. I wonder if a low hydration loaf has more or less of a chance to make the sacred spring. You guys don't understand I want an oven bloom! I am feeding my stiff starter tonight to make Teresa Greenway's introductory loaf tomorrow during the day. If anyone has any questions, feel free. Suggestions on Oven bloom are also welcome. Greenway's recipe is (roughly) 140g starter, 400g flour, 240ml water and 9 salt no autolyse.
A whole wheat four strand braided Challah from today's class.  The flour is a 50/50 mix of white whole wheat and AP. Paul
Cedar Mountain’s Grass Roots Bread - Take 3 I love this bread! Just be aware that the hydration makes for a very wet dough. I really should have read my notes from before where it mentioned that this dough was quite wet. It does come together with the stretches and folds but I really should have cut back on the water to get a dough that was a bit easier to handle. I also tried to streamline the procedure for the add-ins so that I wasn’t prepping each ingredient individually. By the way, did I mention that this was a very wet dough? ;-) Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Add-ins 25 g hulless oats 40 g wild rice 190 g boiling water 25 g barley flakes 50 g large flake oats 175 g water Dough 75 g rye berries 75 g spelt berries 75 g kamut berries 75 g Red Fife berries 750 g unbleached all purpose flour 725 g filtered water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 40 g local yogurt 250 g 3 stage 100 hydration levain (procedure in recipe) Bran/all purpose flour for feeding the levain Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day I got a decent rise considering the hydration. Note to myself: Reduce the water by at least 50 grams if not more!
Lately I’ve been obsessing over focaccia. Its one of those deceptive breads and its not until you taste an excellent one that you understand there is so much more to focaccia than meets the eye. So much that in Italy these breads are rarely made at home, generally focaccia is left to the professionals who have not just the know how but access to the best ingredients and really hot ovens. Focaccia takes patience, the best flour and absolutely the very best EVOO you can afford. It  is an enriched dough after all, and it is the olive oil that makes all the difference. So use the good stuff and don’t be stingy!  Click on any image to begin the slide show. When it comes to Italian focaccia it is generally accepted there are two kinds worth knowing about. One from the north (Liguria), Focaccia Classica di Genova and the other from the south (Puglia), Focaccia Barese. I included a recipe for the Genovese version in my first book, Piano, Piano, Piano for any of you who might happen to have a copy of that book. Focaccia Barese is made in and around the city of Bari in the region of Puglia. The authentic version uses lievito madre(sourdough) and is made with a combination of Tipo “0” and the semolata di grano rimacinata flour milled from sun kissed durum wheat grown in Puglia. The starter is a stiff one and should be refreshed 4 hours before being used. I used 100 grams of liquid levain,  100 grams of semolina flour and 50 grams water for that refreshment. The curious addition of boiled rice potato to the dough gives it an intriguing flavour and also enhances the shelf life. This focaccia keeps nicely for 2 or 3 days. The formula I used is the most official one I could find, from the facebook page of the Consorzio della Focaccia Barese. It makes two 32 cm (12 inch) round focacce but of course you could modify that to fit whatever baking pans you have.
Once again, I had some left over levain from my usual batch of 12 loaves and wanted to use it up. I came up with this combo because the daughter complained that the last couple of loaves I made for her were too plain. These have Spelt and Kamut flakes as well as bulgur and a touch of honey. I added a pinch of yeast to try to speed things up a bit because I was putting this together fairly late in the day. Recipe Makes one batard Add-ins 25 g Spelt flakes 25 g Kamut flakes 25 g bulgur 25 g honey 100 g boiling water Dough 250 g unbleached flour 60 g high extraction Spelt flour (Mill 65 g spelt berries and sift) 60 g high extraction Kamut flour (Mill 65 g Kamut berries and sift) 240 g water 7 g salt 120 g 100% hydration levain (3 stage) 10 g yogurt pinch of yeast Oven spring could definitely be better. I believe that the daughter is taking this one to work so there may not be a crumb shot. ETA: We sliced it here for her to take so here is the crumb.
Here you go clazar! Enjoy and happy baking! Ski
Hello Fresh Loaf! I've been perusing the online world of Bread Baking for about two years now in my quest for good bread. I have found the value and flavor in whole grains and true Sourdough breads, the purity of lean doughs and the beauty of artisan bread.Sadly, I have noticed that almost no one anywhere makes, and posts about, bread as I like it:FWSY, 100% W.W., Artisan, Sourdough.After many trials and errors, I have found my footing in the baking arts and feel that, though 'blogging' is NOT my thing and I hardly spend time online, I owe it to the baking community to give people like my the chance to find some info on this kind of bread. Here is my first post; my hundredth loaf, fresh out of the oven. Ingredients   1.8 oz    Starter: 100%H Sourdough, Fed separately on same as below, ~1 oz kept in mason jar in fridge   8.0 oz    Flour: Hard Red Wheat KAF   6.8 oz    Water: Cold, Filtered   1-2 tsp  Salt: Fresh Cracked Sea Salt ProgressionFriday ~7:00      Levain: Take Starter (Abuelito) out of the fridgeFriday ~19:00        Feed Starter 0.3 oz Water and Flour eachSaturday ~7:30     Feed Starter 0.3 oz Water and Flour each.                              Mix 8.0 oz Flour and 6.8 oz Water to autolyse in covered bowlSaturday ~19:30   Put 1.8 oz Starter on top of dough, fold once                              Put some salt on top, gently stretch and fold once in another direction                              Put some more salt on top, gently stretch and fold until incorporated decently, 12-18 times                           Bulk Ferment: Cover, leaving a little bit of room to breath.                              Feed Starter again and put in fridge for next weekSunday 8:30          Stretch and fold dough 4 times, once each direction, in bowl             8:45       Preshape: Move dough to counter, fold 4 times and place seam side down             8:55       Shape: Gently tighten, tucking dough underneath             9:00          Place same side up in proofing basket. I line a loaf pan with damp paper towels. Cover             11:30        Preheat oven, with whole Dutch Oven inside, to 450F. Uncover Loaf             11:45        Once heated, transfer bread, seam side down into D.O.. I put it on the lid. Score, put ice cube                              in with it, cover, place in oven.                                  +30 minutes: Uncover. Reduce heat to 425 F.   +15 minutes: Remove from oven I have a very active starter here in the sourlands despite all the cold I put it throughInoculation: ~11% final dough weight. Salt: IDK, probably about 1 b%, I tend to go light on salt, will experimentFerment: 13 hours at room temp. 68 F. Proof: 2.75 hours at room temp. Baked for 45 minutes ---After 5 hoursTexture: Gummy, moist, cooked through. Crust not hard. Smell: Slight sour notes and nonsour smells. Taste: Plain, no tang. Nice robust wheatinessFermenting: OK, could use more. Needs better combining.Proofing: Underproofed.
This Loaf is in a 17” long x 6” wide banneton. A friend gave it to me she had bought it years ago in Germany and never used it. 70% Arrowhead Mills AP, 20% home milled Kamut, 5% milled rye and 5% milled Emmer all sifted and bran fed to levains. I used my SD levain, my AYW levain and AYW as part of the liquid. Thus 3 distinct chemistry processes. I mixed everything including salt with a large rubber scraper just till moistened and let it rest 2 hrs. Dough was extensible and poofy by then. Did one lamination and returned dough to bucket. After another hour did one s and f. That’s it. Bulk ferment was 2 hrs. Retarded at 55 degrees for 12 hrs. Baked in my huge 100 yr old granite roaster 500 degrees covered 20 min and 475 degrees uncovered 30 min. Amazing open crumb and incredibly tender. Very full flavor and fragrance is wonderful. For me this affirms that hands on isn’t necessary and that fermentation times and temps are what makes an open crumb and fantastic flavor.
The first step I don't have a picture of and if I did I wouldn't put it here because I know you have all chopped up a large onion.  Red onion goes in guacamole and pico and some salsas but it is always white onion for everything else Mexican - no yellow onions allowed:-)  Put some bacon fat in the bottom of the IP and turn it on saute for 20 minutes at 390 F Then get your Mis en Place arranged in the order that it goes in the pot.  Next in  is the left side of green stuff, a chopped up large tonatillo, half of large jalapeno with seeds and half of a Poblano pepper without the seeds.  These go in after 5 minute of onion sweating but hold back the frozen 4 roasted skinned and seeded Hatch green chilis, and the 3 dried chilis: Guahillo, Ancho,and chipotle for the 3rd addition. Next goes in the chopped frozen Hatch green chilies  and one whole head of chopped fresh garlic some whole cumin and coriander at the 10 minute mark At the 5 minute mark, next goes in the 3 dried chilies, bay leaves, some ground coriander and cumin, peppercorns and dried Mexican oregano along with 1 cup each of beef broth and chicken stock and 2 cups of water.  I used Better the Bullion Low Sodium so no salt is needed.  Here is what the pot looked like with the tongue in there and the beautiful portrait of the tongue itself. Slap the lid on when the 20 minute mark runs out on the saute and set the pressure cooking for 45 minute of high and then let then let it sit for 15 minutes before letting out the steam.  Take the tongue out with the 3 whole cried chilies so that they can cool for 5 minutes before de-seeding the chilies and putting them back in the sauce in the pot and turning it back onto saute  for 20 minutes at 250 F.  See how much the tongue has shrunk in length and how much fatter its.  If yours isn't done, then it back into the pot for another 15 minutes of pressure. Chop up 2 corn tortillas and put them in the pot to thicken the sauce. Now the really fun part - skin the tongue getting off that hard outer part.  Do this when it is still warm or it won't come of very easy and you will kick yourself for not listening to Lucy! Now you have a choice if you want t kinds of Tengua tacos - nplain and Carnitas.  I usually make both.  Slice the tongue into 1/2" thick pieces across the length.  Take half the slices to use later Carnitas and set them aside and then chop the rest into 1/2" cubes and the cubes back in the sauce til it is done thickening up when the 20 minutes is up.  It will look like this before the cubes go back in the port. And look like this when it comes put to go on a flour taco shell that has Muenster cheese melted on it.  This is the 2nd best taco in the world. The best taco requires a bit more work and love.  First you want to caramelize some white onion in a saute pan with some bacon fat in the bottom and half way through you want to brown the slices of reserves tongue to get some crispy edges When it is browned it will look like this Now you chop the slices into 1.2" cubes and put i back in the pan with the caramelized onions No you are not done quite yet.  Now you get out some of the reserved sauce and add it to the pan and get everything lovey dovey warm and cozy. Then you melt some Muenster on some flour taco shells in the Microwave for 30 seconds on high and then pile on the Tengue Carnitas .  Put some cilanto on top with a squeeze of lime if you must and open up a good Mexican Lager which were all brewed by German immigrants to Mexico just like the German Immigrants who made most all the lager beers in the USA.  Now you know why Muenster cheese is preferred by purists on Tengue Carmitas Tacos!  Enjoy!
I've noticed in the forum posts there are, currently, quite a number of  TFL members concerned about the maintenance and vigor of their sourdough seed starters. Being one that doesn't like debates I generally stay away from commenting on those posts. However, in this moment, having been there myself I've chosen not to comment about anyone's concern; instead the following is a description of the simple way I maintain my sourdough seed starter. A bit of backstory: In the summer of 2011 I was forced to admit to myself that the sourdough seed starter I was using was failing. It had turned extraordinarily liquid, and not at all sticky, despite being kept at 100% hydration. I tried to save it but failed. Thinking I'd been doing all the right things, i.e. discarding approximately half my stash and replacing it with an appropriate amount of flour and water each week  I was at a loss to know what to do next. I sought help, specifically from TFL's resident microbiologist, Debra Wink. She responded almost instantly, nonetheless my seed starter had bit the dust, mostly because of my ignorance and uncertainty of what to do. However, with Debra's nearly daily guidance I nursed a replacement starter to early maturity. Subsequently, I had enough intelligence to ask her about maintaining my new colony of yeast and bacteria. She asked me to describe how I'd maintained my defunct starter. I described as above: throw some away, add some flour and water, stir it up and put it back into the refrigerator. Debra didn't criticize, she simply asked "How often do you bake sourdough loaves, and do you make extra starter"? The answers were "weekly" and "yes", explaining the extra starter was insurance I'd made enough for the bake because I couldn't scrape all the starter out of the bowl. Her reply, "So you've got this perfectly good leftover fresh leaven. why don't you save it for next week's bake? "You only need to save about 20 grams to make enough for your next bake." WOW! Why didn't I think of that!? Over the next few months the following discipline emerged. For each weekly bake I make enough leaven to satisfy the loaves to be baked, and 60g extra. I only need 40g, but I still haven't learned how to scrape everything out of the bowl. I take 40g of the leftover leaven and mix it with 40g of Bread Flour, and 40g of water. I cover it and let it rest for 45 mins to insure its homogeneously hydrated before chilling. "Why so much"? you might ask. See, I'm a belt-and-suspender kind of guy. As such, I put half of the fed leftover leaven, split evenly into two half-pint Mason jars. I so much avoid errors that I won't dispose of jar #2's backup seed starter until I know I mixed its replacement properly.  The approximately 60g in each 1/2 pint jar is then returned to my refrigerator to rest safely for another week. I don't wash the half-pint jars: never.  I scrape as much of the remaining previous week's leftover seed starter I can from the jars, half fill them with hot tap water, and shake them vigorously to remove the stuff I can't scrape out. When they are clean to the eye (including their plastic lids) I fill the jar nearly full and place both the open jar and its lid in the microwave. I put a chop stick from a nearby Chinese restaurant in the jar, and nuke the set for 1 and 1/2 minutes (long enough to cause the jar's water to boil for 25 to 30 seconds). The lids also are charged with hot water. their screw-on ridges provide the same safety as the chopstick does. Most of you reading this know the danger of super-heated water, i.e. water heated in a smooth glass jar in a microwave won't always boil when it reaches 212°F. It will continue, however to collect energy from the microwave until the superheated water is pushed into an unbalanced state. At that point the water will "explode" (instantly vaporize) and cause damage to the microwave and possibly its operator. The chop stick and the lids' ridges provide nucleation centers that trigger boiling at the proper temperature thus prevent violence. I cool the semi-sanitized lidded jars in the refrigerator before filling them. But I'm not done with them yet. The yeast and bacteria, although sluggish, are not dormant at normal refrigerator temperature. Over the next three days I monitor their expansion, peaking, and falling. So far it's the same every week, and another indication that all is well with my sourdough seed starter. I've been practicing this discipline for eight years. My sourdough seed starter residents are offspring of the yeast and bacteria present eight years ago. The derived sourdough leaven I use to bake almost weekly performs exactly as it did the many weeks before. I have no doubt that this will continue so long as I stick to this discipline. I also have a discipline I practice developing sourdough leaven. In simple terms I build the necessary quantity for each week's bake in three progressive builds,  each separated from the earlier feeding by eight hours. I believe this is a fail safe approach using seed starters that spend most of their time in a refrigerator. Happy baking to all, David G
This is a 76% hydration ciabatta modeled on that of Scott McGee.    Unusual in the low hydration and that he shapes these. Dinner the other evening with friends for “Sunday macaroni and gravy”, which may be an Americanism for pasta with tomato sauce.  Also includes sausages, meatballs and ribs, all cooked in the “gravy”.  I hadn’t made a ciabatta in a while, so it was off to the races as part of our contribution to dinner. Today I’m once again seeing our visiting-the-U.S. London TFL compatriot Abe (in olden days "Lechem" and even older "A BakEr").  So I thought that I’d bake him one too.  But I wanted to bake something bigger.  Bumped up from 500g to 750g each, they are pretty easy to make, The biga was made the evening before and then warehoused in the refrigerator until mix time.  I’ve tried the Jason Molina Cocodrillo ciabatta quite a while back, and although it is a cinch to make, the flavor is lacking, so I ditched the effort and formula after two consecutive trials. These were stretched out long enough that I had to load the baking deck sideways instead of head in.  13 minutes with steam, 16 minutes after, and 3 minutes of venting.  These could have gone a few minutes more. If you are a fan of the super open ciabatta crumb that mice and small children can fall through, this isn’t the formula for you.  But it is a ciabatta in every way, with modest open crumb,  thin crisp crust, and a light as a feather crumb. And makes fabulous toast. And as toast:
Any help would be appreciated. Straight dough dough temp 77 proofing @ 95 degrees and 75% humidity 30-45 mins frying @375-380 thank you.
A couple of weeks ago I made the Tomato & Nigella seed loaf from Emanuel Hadjiandreou"s book "How to bake bread".  I was drooling over the photos and decided then I would make 2 more of these recipe's next bake.  So yesterday I prepped the levain in the morning and then about 2 pm started mixing dough.  I also did 300 slap and folds instead of 200.  It was about 31 deg C outside here, so I had to watch the dough carefully.  I won't detail method as it was fairly standard with 45 minutes between coil folds.  Bulk ferment until about 70% bigger, 20 minute rest after preshape and cold overnight proof.  All loaves were shaped and retarted 4 hours after mixing. Beetroot bread was first up.  Lead photo 219 g bread flour 119 g water + extra 10 g 95 g grated raw beetroot 6 g olive oil 5 g salt 131 g 100% levain Interesting dough that was purple - and I added 10 g extra water as I felt it was a bit stiff.  half an hour after the start of bf, I realised I had forgotten to add the olive oil so added it with a lamination and carried on. The dough was lovely and silky Crumb shot - love the spots of red, wonder how purple dough turns into yellow bread!  Beetroot flavour is not obvious but maybe next meal ex freezer will be stronger.  so pretty!! Cheese & herb Bread. 191 g Bread flour 128 g water 6 g salt 1 g chopped parlsey 106 g cheddar cheese (I used Tasty cheddar) 0.75 g chilli flakes (I chickened out and reduced this, it should have been 1 g) 142 g 100% levain Lovely silky dough as well.  When I went to score before baking, the dough was very very firm. The smell when baking was amazing. Crumb - disappointed I can't see the parsley.  maybe next time more and less finely chopped.  Cheese fairly strong in the bread, but because it was grated it has vanished into the crumb.  It is a little salty for my taste, maybe next time a standard cheddar might be better but will see what I think when the loaf has gone. Lastly I made 1:2:3 with Durum, rye, barley & potato flour 196 g bread flour 30 g barley flour 30 g rye flour 30 g durum flour 15 g potato flour 256 g water 6 g salt 9 g starter built to an 88 g levain (from recipe flour & water) This was actually pretty wet and I did an extra 50 slap and folds.  Dough didn't rise much before shaping.  It spread a bit and you can see that I was still a bit short on dough strength.  Still it is a nice bread that I have made before (when it turned out better, oh well... still tastes good!).  The lid on DO wasn't shut properly and you can see the crust is a bit dull. Crumb isn't too bad after all. Our summer is very hot with most days 28 - 32 deg C so I was happy things went so well.  The doughs had 14 hours in the fridge before baking. A rainy day would be sooo nice, our last real rain was just before Christmas and we had 15 mm in January but spread over 3 days so it does not do much. Bake happy everyone. Leslie
Well friends, my second Forkish effort in as many weeks from "Flour, Water, Salt and Yeast." This is a robust bread. Baking in the Dutch oven really gives a snap to the crust, while the crumb is open soft and shred able. Boy did the loaf ever snap, crackle and pop when I removed from the hot DO to the cooling rack! As I don't really like the taste of whole wheat, I reduced the WW in the starter by half and made up the difference with white rye flour. The result is much more to my taste. With about 3 Tbs of WW flour in this loaf, my 2 kilos of Organic whole wheat flour will last some time. It lives in the fridge. Well this is another recipe that will go into my baking rotation. I have firmly baked myself out of my rut with this one! Happy baking! Ski
"You succeed you learn something, you fail you learn something." I followed Dabrownman's advice to the letter. A very small batch
Small Batch equals Small Bread I thought that the dough was at the 1.75-ish cup point, thus I heated the forge, put it in wet parchment. Took out the heated cast iron, placed it in, poured in a half a cup of water under the parchment and started the usual 450 after 500 for 20 then for 30. Herein is the result, small, unimpressive, with no 'boom' really. Not sure if something went wrong, I feel like I way over-proofed. I am moving more toward the second proofing for no more than 45 minutes- ever. But the whole waiting for 85% just doesn't work for me. I wonder, I wonder a lot, about the differences between all of us in space, geography, and thus temperature. I read about Dabrownman's adventures in AZ baking, basically like baking in adobe and wonder how much different it is to baking here in Louisiana- like baking under water. Then I had another thought, my dough seemed to have expanded out more than up. So maybe the batch of dough should be wider? No, because many people bake on a flat stone and that allows for serious wide-age. So if I had to ask for a conclusion, I would say, too small, too proofed (despite it only rose 50%) and ye gods Valdus- you need to work on shaping! Further, for slap and fold, it better be a pretty big piece of dough. Comments are welcome and encouraged.
Josey Baker Whole Wheat Sourdough Bread David Snyder February, 2019 Browsing cookbooks at a branch library, I found Josey Baker's “Josey Baker Bread.” I have driven by and peeked into his bakery in San Francisco, but have never tasted his products. I confess I found what he charged for a slice of toast off-putting. But, folks seem to like his bread. Looking through the book, I found some recipes for 100% Whole Wheat sourdough bread. It certainly looked good in the photos, and I am still looking for my personal favorite 100% whole wheat sourdough. So, I checked out the book. I won't comment on the book's style except to say it is an attempt to seduce some one into baking bread at home who is still a bit frightened and mystified by the whole process. It is certainly a worthy objective. Anyway, here's my first bake of this bread. Note: Baker does not call for a true autolyse. He combines all the ingredients in the “Final Dough” at once and, after a mix to just distribute them evenly in the dough, he lets it sit for a half hour before beginning a series of stretch and folds at half-hourly intervals. The procedure described below is what I actually did. I mixed the final dough, including the levain but not the salt, and let it rest for a period before adding the salt. This is the way I was taught at the San Francisco Baking Institute to autolyse dough when a liquid levain is used. Total Dough 1 loaf 2 loaves 4 loaves Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Whole Wheat flour 508 1016 2032 100 Water 423 846 1692 83 Salt 11 21 42 2.1 Total 942 1883 3766 185.1 Levain 1 loaf 2 loaves 4 loaves Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Whole Wheat flour 50 100 200 100 Water (cool) 60 120 240 120 Sourdough starter 6 12 24 12 Total 116 232 464 232 Mix the levain ingredients well in a 4-6 cup bowl. Cover well. Ferment at room temperature (72-76ºF) for 8-12 hours. Note: The sourdough starter I used to seed the levain is 100% hydration. It is actually 70% AP, 20% WW and 10% whole rye. For purposes of the “Total Dough” formula, I treated it as if it were entirely whole wheat. Note: Because of a social obligation, I was not able to mix the final dough right when the levain was ripe. I refrigerated the ripe levain overnight and continued the process the next morning. Final Dough 1 loaf 2 loaves 4 loaves Ingredient Wt (g) Whole Wheat Flour 455 910 1820 Water (warm) 360 720 1440 Salt 11 21 42 Ripe levain 116 232 464 Total 942 1883 3766 Procedures Mix the flour and water and levain to a shaggy mass. Cover and let rest for 30-60 minutes. (Note: I actually autolysed for a bit over 2 hours.) Sprinkle the salt over the dough and mix it in with a spatula, spoon or your hand. Distribute the salt evenly using a pinching procedure (as described in FWSY or Tartine No. 2), alternating with stretch and folds in the bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment until increased in volume by 50% and well aerated with bubbles (about 3 hours at 80ºF). Perform stretch and folds in the bowl every 30 minutes for the first 2 hours. If making more than one loaf, divide the dough evenly into the desired number of pieces. Pre-shape piece(s) into balls. Cover and let rest for 10-30 minutes. Shape into boules or bâtards. Place in floured baskets and cover or place in food-safe plastic bags. Proof the loaves 3-4 hours (per Josey Baker). I proofed 1 hour at room temperature, then refrigerated to bake the next day. Pre-heat oven to 475ºF 45-60 minutes before baking. Bake either on a baking stone with steam for the first 15 minutes or in a Dutch oven, covered for the first 20 minutes. The total bake time should be 45-50 minutes, to an internal temperature of 205ºF. Remove to a cooling rack. Cool completely before slicing. Note: Baker says one can cold retard this bread, either in bulk (after Step 4.) or as formed loaves. (after Step 8.) He does not say whether or not he would ever do both retardations. The flour I used was Turkey Red wheat, freshly milled in a Mockmill 100 set at its finest setting. I did not sift out or remill any of the bran. The dough was soft and tacky but very manageable. It seemed to be developing some strength curing the stretch and folds, but was quite loose during shaping. Lovely dough made with 100% home-milled Red Turkey wheat Formed loaves, ready for a 12 hour nap at 40ºF Baked loaves, cooling The crumb I sliced the bread after it had cooled for about 3 hours. The crust was chewy, except for the ears which were crunchy. The crumb was very moist and tender with a wheaty and mildly sour flavor. My experience has been that this type of bread improves after a day or so. Happy baking! David
There are the dreams of night that are forgotten with the morning coffee; and, there are the dreams that come as one considers the bread one is eating with morning coffee. Thus, one steps forth in the bright morning light, to find the 7 Pillars of Wisdom. (T.E.L. will forgive me because one of the best breakfast breads I ever had was in Hafer Al-Batin.) I have been seeking a better PdC for a long time. In the last half of 2018, I was looking at some mix of fresh ground grain and white flour. Those results can be understood by the fact that New Years came and went, and I was still looking. More promising is my current approach of grinding a mix of grains, sifting out the bran, making a dough, and soaking the bran, then recombining the bran into the dough AFTER the gluten is well developed. This morning's grain mix was rye, spelt, Kamut, red spring wheat, and red winter wheat. The dough was all sourdough, and the starter is added right up front when I first add the water to the flour. The bran was soaked in a bit of l evain. All in all, one of my most successful baking experiments in many years. For a commercial product, I might switch the red winter wheat for a white wheat, but here we have an over-flowing herb garden, and most of our menus want a full flavored bread.
Their first egg was eaten by ravens and their 2nd one was eaten by a ring tail but hopefully they will pay more attention to their eggs from now on!  They are beautiful Bbids to watch. https://www.azgfd.com/wildlife/viewing/webcamlist/baldeagle/baldeaglecam/
So my baguette are looking nice and tasty. Crisp, blown and nicely colored top and with a nice brown bottom... however, the side of the baguettes is slighlty undercooked, the crust is really soft and does not get brown. I leave a good 5cm between each 250gr baguettes. Am I placing them too close to each other?
Inspired by the Bourke Street Bakery’s Spiced Fruit recipe posted on this page: http://youcandoitathome.blogspot.com/2011/06/bourke-street-bakerys-spiced-fruit.html. I have baked this before but course, I have to change things up a bit by subbing out some of the raisins for cranberries and soaking the dried fruit in tea. I am also using a mixer now rather than slap and folds. Makes 3 loaves INGREDIENTS 770 g unbleached flour 110 g high extraction Durum flour (Mill 125 g Durum berries and sift. Save the bran for the levain.) 50 g freshly ground flax 620 g filtered water 180 golden raisins (sultanas) 180 dried cranberries 40 g plain yogurt 1 heaping tbsp David’s Tea Forever Nuts Herbal Tea + boiling water 50 g brewed tea 2 tsp ground cinnamon 3.5 tsp of mixed spices (4 tsp ground cinnamon, .5 tsp each of ground ginger and ground cloves, 1 tsp each of ground nutmeg and ground coriander - Note this makes more than you need.) 22 g salt 465 g of 4 stage levain (100% hydration)(Procedure in recipe) Extra flour to feed the levain. Two nights before: The morning before: The night before: Dough day: Baking Day I am pleased with the oven spring considering the amount of fruit in these. Hopefully the crumb isn’t too closed.
My second loaf on TFL. This time, with an increased bulk ferment, slightly decreased inoculation, and, taking the advice of Alison Kay, increased salt. Final Ingredients   1.6 oz    Starter: 100%H Sourdough, Fed separately   8.0 oz    Flour: Hard Red Wheat K.A.F.   6.8 oz    Water: Cold, Filtered   1-2 tsp  Salt: Fresh Cracked Sea Salt ProgressionThurs.    ~21:00   Levain: Take Starter (Abuelito) out of the fridgeFriday      ~7:00     Feed Starter 0.2 oz Water and Flour eachFriday    ~19:30     Feed Starter 0.3 oz Water and Flour each.                           Autolyse: Mix 8.0 oz Flour and 6.8 oz Water in covered bowlSat.         ~8:00   Mix: Put 1.8 oz Starter, then salt, in portions, on dough, folding in between. Fold to incorporate                           Bulk Ferment: Cover, leaving a little bit of room to breath.                              Feed Starter with 0.3 oz each and put in fridge for next weekSat.       ~20:00    Degas, stretch and foldSunday     6:45      Stretch and fold dough 4 times, once each direction, in bowl                 6:55   Preshape: Move dough to counter, fold 4 times and place seam side down                 7:05   Shape: Gently tighten, tucking dough underneath                 7:10       Place same side up in proofing basket. I line a loaf pan with damp paper towels. Cover                 9:25       Preheat oven, with whole Dutch Oven inside, to 450F. Uncover Loaf                 9:40   Transfer bread, seam side down into D.O.. Score, put ice cube in with it, cover, place in oven.                               +30 minutes: Uncover. Reduce heat to 425 F.                               +15 minutes: Remove from oven Inoculation: ~9.6% final dough weight.        Salt: This time bumped up to 0.2 oz, 2.3 b%. very highFerment: 23 hours at room temp. 68 F.       Proof: 2.5 hours at room temp. Baked for 45 minutes -----After Slicing This came out much nicer than the last. Sour aroma was very present from uncovering the dough to baking to baked loaf.That came through as flavor too, and will likely strengthen. The crust was hard and crisp, crumb fairly open, but a bit gummy.May need more proofing and shaping.To all of you unsure how long dough can be left at room temp., 2 consecutive 12 hour cycles and 3 hours being worked did not hurt the bread.
and orange zest with semi-sweet chocolate chips. I took bits and pieces from TFL posters Shaio Ping and Beatrice as well as Jay on Perfect Sourdough a Facebook bread blogging site. I used his formula with a major twist. I made the levain with AP and cocoa and YW . I added another 100g of YW to the dough . This was a very large batch of dough. A two hour autolyse with everything except add ins. One s&f and an hour later one lamination for add ins. That’s it. No shaping just folded the edges under this the gorgeous free form bursts. The crumb is open and tender and so rich. The loaves were retarded 18-20 hrs.
I'm a 100% wholegrain loaf nut. I don't really want to make anything else. And I regularly make goat's kefir at home, so when Abe told me about a loaf he'd made using whole Spelt and kefir, I was keen to have a go. This is the 4th attempt and the best so far. The flour is from Shipton Mill in the UK. The levain was built with 50/50 flour and kefir at 26C degrees for 19 hours. 26C is maintained though a long bulk and proof with gentle stretch and folds and then this time, I retarded overnight before baking. It's a little burnt - I've recently treated myself to an Emile Henry loaf pan and am getting used to the way it works - but the crust and crumb are good. The flavour is what keeps bringing me back; so creamy and honeyed. I guess it's the predominance of lactic acid bacteria (over acetic) due to the kefir. I'm not stopping with honing this recipe because I want to keep tasting it! Thank you, Abe.
Last month I participated in the Community Bake for Hamelmans 5 grain sourdough bread. I made it 3 times because I was intrigued and pleased with the results. I found it was not a dough that it did not knead machine mixing. It benefited from putting some pepita seeds in the soaker, and an autolyse for the flours before adding the starter . I really benefitted from all the information that others provided. I did not have a charming canine assistant but I did have paper towels. I used these to prevent icky sticky taps. The pictures came out crappy , but the bread did not! And of course I had to share the breads with my writing group.
Considering what I saw before it went into the oven (nearly a pancake) I am pretty happy with the results. Next time I think I will start with some slapping and folding. Also I feel that 1-2-3 needs more water, is it 71% hydration? Here is a visual journal of the steps... 1-2-3 Second Attempt Special thanks to DanAyo for his help on this attempt.
Having pretty much healed from a lost argument with my mandolin slicer, I decided it was time to make another attempt at the 5-grain loaf and put into practice the kind advice given by the great folks here. So built the 3-stage levain, made the soaker (toasted 5-grain flakes, flax, poppy and black sesame seeds), mixed the dough as per the recipe, first whisking together the dry ingredients in one bowl and the wet stuff in another, then added the dry to the wet. Per Dan's advice, gave the dough two sets of 150 SLAFs, adding a few grams more water to make the dough slappable. Over the course of the next 90 minutes, gave the dough two sets of letter folds on the bench. Retarded the dough overnight, then preshaped, rested and shaped loaves the next morning with sunflower-seed coatings before proofing in baskets for a couple of hours. Placed the 3 loaves (about 450g each) in the roaster, spritzed, slashed and spritzed, then baked covered for 25 minutes and uncovered for 20. While I'm still a long way from the lacy, round slices that everyone else seems to have come up with, I'm pretty happy with the progress that's been made. I didn't get to taste these, they were given away, but have been assured that this is "great bread". Skibum's Double-chocolate Biscotti Well, then it was time for a little douceur. I could make my usual yogurt cakes, or try Skibum's chocolate biscotti, for which he generously shared the recipe. It didn't take long to decide in favor of the double chocolate. I swapped in a quarter-cup of chopped crystallized ginger with the chocolate chips; other than that, I followed the recipe as closely as I could (except that I didn't have an AP flour, so used half bread flour and half golden plain flour). Edit: just remembered that I replaced the 6 T of butter with just under 5T  of coconut oil... Once again, whisked together the dry in one bowl and the wet stuff in another. Added the dry to the wet in thirds. Tossed the choco chips and ginger in the last third of the dry (the little bit of flour coating helps keep the add-ins from sinking to the bottom). The stuff felt like clay! I'd been wondering how I was going to shape a log, but it was pretty much the only thing that could be done with a dough that stiff. Ski says to form one 12x4 log, I opted for two 12x2. Easy peasy. And, boy, are they good! I can see that I already need to make another batch. Shiao-Ping's cashew, carrot and turmeric no-knead bread Whew, time for something hands-off. Shiao-Ping's cashew, carrot and turmeric bread was one of the first loaves I bookmarked when I discovered TFL. I've had the ingredients on hand for months, so finally decided to give it a go. Mixed up the 81% hydration dough per her recipe and let it sit. And sit. She's right: it was too tempting: one has to fight the overwhelming urge to scoop up the mass of soup and try to give a few good rounds of SLAFs. But it would have been a very messy procedure  This was almost a batter, more than a dough. It smelled and looked lovely, so I just contented myself with a couple of letter folds about four hours into the bulk. Oddly enough, the pre-shape went quite well, but I found it too hard to get good tension on the final shape. So wound up with a couple of flat loaves that have okay crumb and wonderful taste and texture. This was excellent toasted, with just a scraping of butter! The nigella-seed coating works well with the turmeric and the cashews. Will be trying this one again, perhaps lowering the hydration a bit to get a more shapeable dough. Edit: There were, in fact, two things that differed from Shiao-Ping's recipe: I used fresh grated turmeric, rather than dried. And instead of freshly extracted carrot juice, I used some organic stuff out of a bottle. I was chagrined to read -- after mixing the dough -- that there was an added acidifier: lemon juice! Whether one or both of these had an impact on the dough's soupiness, I may never know.
Greeting fellow bakers and happy Canada Day to our Canadian friends and happy Presidents Day to my American friends! Sorry for the repetition, but this P. Reinhart recipe has become my favourite sandwich loaf. I use a whole light rye starter and it is delicious sandwich bread! I have baked this recipe in a loaf pan, free standing in the oven with the pizza stone but this time decided to try baking in a hot cast iron Dutch oven, 20 minutes covered and 20 minutes uncovered. Now Forkish style invlolves proofing in the banneton seam side down and baking seam side up. On this bake, the way the seams broke down, the finished loaf had less loft the the final proofed dough. So when I next bake this bread, I will proof seam side up and bake seam side down. I hope this change in method will give the dough more volume. Happy baking! Ski
A Sourdough Crossroads Don't think for minute because of the title that I am going to give up this wonderful hobby (using the word hobby seems a bit limited to me but it is what it is- another expression I have never liked). If I gave up baking sourdough I would have to go back to brewing beer, and there is nothing more messy and demanding that that. I once ruined a perfectly good carpet with an exploding mead recipe. No, it seems that I am at a crossroads, meaning that I think I am done "playing" with sourdough and I would like to start baking. I want to pick one recipe, just one sourdough recipe and turn it to perfection. Turn it into a consistent assembly line press that I can do over and over again without much deviation. The small, trivial, if not amusing problem I have is which recipe to use? I have done Emilie Raffa's Everyday Sourdough over and over again but don't like the ignoring overnight bulk ferment. I think I would prefer something that needs action, something I could practice my slapping and folding with. I have done the infamous Tartine Bread, of baking and internet fame, with good results and positive family tasting reviews ("As in, if I am on a diet never make this bread!) and it gives me two loaves to experiment. Yet I sense that Tartine Bread has just too many variables. Since I am still obsessed with more and more bloom I want to reduce the amount of variables to a minimum. After a good talk with DanAyo, actually a great talk, I have decided to go with one of the most basic sourdough recipes out there- the 1-2-3 method using 50/50 AP/Bread Flour starting at 150g starter for a loaf of 900g. I plan on sticking to this recipe until it bursts the sides of my oven. I'm probably going to bake other things, but this one will be how I solve the great oven bloom goal.
Last time I made the Scott MeGee Ciabatta, but with a biga.  Today, I converted it to a 125% hydration AP levain.  Whereas the biga had 40% of the flour pre-fermented, I dropped this down to 20%, and also dropped the IDY by at least 2/3.  The overall hydration stays at 76%. I kept the large bread at 750g but decided to not stretch it so far this time so it has more girth, which I like.  The taste is sweet and delicate and this ciabatta makes great morning toast. Steam released, & rotated. ~750g x 1 beast, ~370g x 2 ordinary sized. Some additional notes:
I was six when the Larraburu Brothers Bakery shut down. I don't recall what the bread tasted like, and I'm not even sure I ever had any. But I'm fascinated by the history and how widespread and adored this bread was. The number of loaves, the loaves shipping around the world, even to France, indicates that it wasn't just a small group of aficionados that were keen on this bread. I grew up on Colombo rolls and sliced bread, Oroweat rye, and 'artificial' sourdough baguettes from Safeway.  And I always had a Boudin bread bowl with clam chowder whenever I visited San Francisco. Living in rural New Zealand, it's very hard to find San Francisco style sourdough bread. A local baker looks at me quizzically when I ask for sourdough bread that is intentionally sour. He tries to explain how people misunderstand, and that sourdough doesn't mean the bread tastes sour. I then have to counter-explain that I know this, and that bakeries in San Francisco did intentionally ramp up the sour because some people like that taste. Like many on this board I'm still searching for my perfect bread to make every weekend. I'm pretty sure it won't be a Larraburu clone, but I think I will borrow some aspects of that bread. Understanding it is still a worthwhile endeavour. Anyhow, this post is about my research into Larraburu Brothers bread, and my attempts at making it. In comparing the NYT article ['NYT'] to the Galal et all paper ['Galal'], I notice some differences, but also a lot of confirmation.  Here is the superset of data from those two sources, including my take on why they conflict and how to resolve the conflicts. GALAL: Each day a piece of straight dough or starter sponge known as the "Mother" is saved and refrigerated to be used as a starter sponge the following day. NOTE: we don't know the refrigeration temperature, but we know that regular refrigeration is part of this starter's life. NYT: A baker will take about two pounds of dough for a previous day's batch, and this is the starter for the next day's run.  The starter is left to rest for a few hours and is then placed in a dough mixer with salt, flour, and water. When this is blended, a sponge, as it is called in breadmaking circles, is produced. The sponge in this case weighs about 600 pounds. It is then divided into a dozen 50-pound pieces. NOTE: At 50% hydration (from Galal) this is a 1/100/200 feeding, which is quite substantial. GALAL: The starter sponge consists of 100 parts of clear flour (14% protein), approximately 50 parts of water, and 50 parts of the starter sponge NOTE: This is a 1/1/2 feeding, 100-fold different from the NYT article. Personally I trust researchers to get facts more correct than I do newspaper reporters who are notoriously error prone. However, the bakery did have to make a hell of a lot of bread, and the reporter specified "two pounds", "600 pounds" divided into a "dozen" "50-pound" pieces, which is all self-consistent.  One way to resolve this difference is if the Galal paper had a single misprint. If it instead read "and 0.50 parts of the starter sponge" it would be exactly in line with the NYT article. Nonetheless, that is a very heavy dilution of starter material, and so I am still somewhat skeptical. NOTE: The other inconsistency is that the NYT article suggests that the sponge contains salt. The Galal paper doesn't include salt in the sponge. GALAL: The ingredients are mixed and fermented for 9-10 hr at 80F NYT: Each of these pieces is put back into the mixer and more flour, salt and water is added. Each of these produces about 800 pounds of dough. GALAL: The bread dough is made by mixing 100 parts of flour (12% protein), 60 parts of water, 15 parts of sponge, and 1.5-2% salt. NOTE: Based on NYT, the sponge is 0.0625% of the final dough weight. Based on Galal, the sponge is 0.0849% of the final dough weight. These values aren't too far off each other. My best guess is that the bakery in 1976 was operating on a slightly different recipe than back in 1964.  And I suppose the value from 1976 by Galal is probably more reliable and/or represents improvements that the bakery made over those 12 years. GALAL: The dough rests 1 hour, and then is divided, molded, and deposited on canvas dusted with corn meal or rice flour. NYT: This dough is allowed to rest for an hour and is then molded, weighted and shaped. NOTE: nice to see some consistency here between the two accounts. GALAL: The dough is proofed for 4 hr at 105 F (41 C) and 96% relative humidity... NYT: The resulting loaves are "proofed" in a dry steam box for four hours NOTE: Again, nice to see some consistency here between the two accounts. NYT: When they are removed, they are left to stand for another two to three hours. GALAL: ...and baked at 420F (216 C) for 40-50 minutes in a Perkins oven with direct injection of low pressure steam (5 psi). NYT: Finally they are baked 40 minutes. NOTE: Again, complete consistency So these accounts are rather consistent, and they fill in the gaps in the other's story. The biggest inconsistency is the amount of mother added to the sponge. Is it 1/1/2 or 1/100/200? I should think if it was 1/100/200, 9-10 hours at 80F would not be long enough to visually activate the sponge. So the bakers must have been working blind.  It does, however, allow for a long (4 hour) hot (41C) bulk ferment. This weekend made a bread with mostly white flour, a smallish 10% sponge, and 5 hours fermenting at 39C (the hottest my incubator runs at). It worked out just fine - it may have overproofed slightly, but it still had some air and oven spring and a nice enough crumb for my tastes.
This was inspired by both Ian and Cedar Mountain. Recipe Makes 3 loaves of ~735 g cooked weight each Add-ins 100 g black rice 50 g barley flakes 50 g hemp hearts 50 g honey 30 g yogurt 50 g water Dough 100 g high extraction rye flour (115 rye berries, milled and sifted) 200 g high extraction Selkirk wheat flour (230 g Selkirk berries, milled and sifted) 700 g unbleached flour 700 g filtered water 22 g salt 250 g levain Bran and barley flakes for the bannetons Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day Nice oven spring considering how wet this dough was.
Week three and bread three. Last time, i felt the structure of the dough was lacking, so I did a few more stretch and folds before shaping. To facilitate fermentation, I also did some more folds early and slightly decreased the salt. In this i was certainly right, for the first time, the dough doubled in bulk overnight and proofed very well. Final Ingredients   1.6 oz   Starter: 100%H Sourdough, Fed separately   8.0 oz      Flour: Hard Red Wheat K.A.F.   6.8 oz     Water: Cold, Filtered  1-2  tsp      Salt: Fresh Cracked Sea Salt ProgressionThurs.    ~21:00   Levain: Take Starter (Abuelito) out of the fridgeFriday      ~7:00                Feed Starter              ~19:30                Feed Starter                          Autolyse: Mix 8.0 oz Flour and 6.8 oz Water in covered bowlSat.         ~7:30  Ferment: Add 1.6 oz Starter, then salt, on dough, between stretch and folds. Cover             ~20:00                  Degas, stretch and fold. Re-cover             ~21:30                  Degas, stretch and fold. Re-coverSunday     7:00                  Degas, stretch and fold. Re-cover                 7:30 Preshape: Move dough to counter, fold 4 times and place seam side down                 7:40      Shape: Gently tighten, tucking dough underneath                 7:45                  Place same side up in proofing basket. I line a loaf pan with damp paper towels. Cover                 9:45                  Preheat oven, with whole Dutch Oven inside, to 450F. Uncover Loaf               10:00                  Transfer bread, put ice cube in with it, cover, place in oven.                               +35 minutes: Uncover. Reduce heat to 425 F.                               +15 minutes: Remove from oven Inoculation: ~9.6% final dough weight.        Salt: Roughly 2 b%, maybe a bit lessFerment: 24 hours at room temp. 68 F.       Proof: 2.0 hours at room temp. Baked for 45 minutes -----After Cutting Like the last, this had a great flavor. It rose well and sprung decently, shaping could have been tighter though.The extra five minutes covered seems to have helped firm the crust more, which was very crunchy once toasted.
This bread was so good, I thought it was worthy of creating my first blog!  The original recipe came from Rose Levy Berenbaum's site, here; she cites original recipe from Chef Andrew Meltzer.  The version she posts is a yeasted loaf and was spectacularly good.  I made it as she posted and below is the result.  The dough contains an oat porridge, toasted oats, and the loaves are rolled in oats before baking.  I was obviously a little more successful in rolling one versus the other below! ;-) I wanted to see if I could sourdough-ify it, and 'for fun' (?) put it in a loaf pan for some more uniform slices for our morning toast.  The sourdough methodology that has been working for me is based on the Tartine method.  As I get more comfortable with sourdough, I see how flexible it is and adaptable to one's schedule.  I finally pulled off a salt rising bread earlier this year, and that process was not all that forgiving!  Maybe once you get it down, but, whew, took lots of tries to get that one off the ground. So back to yummy oat sourdough- I set up a levain the night before, then in the morning, made the porridge and toasted oats, and proceeded with the rest of the final dough ingredients.  I backed off on the honey and salt from Rose's original recipe.  The dough fermented about 3- 3.5 hours, and proofed for 1.5 hours before baking it off.   The resulting loaf has a nicer chew to it than the yeast version, and just a subtly nicer flavor, in our opinion.  The crust is really nice in these loaves, so for the last bake, I baked the loaves for about 20 minutes, removed them from the loaf pans, and put the loaves back in the oven 'free-form' on my baking stone.  That got the crusts all the way around nice and toasty. Toast a piece of this with your morning coffee or tea, and life is very good! Here's what I did (quantity also upped slightly from Rose's post): Levain for night before: 30 g whole wheat flour 30 g bread flour 60 water 2- 3 tsp 100% hydration starter Next morning, with levain all nice and puffy: 275 g H2O all of levain 45 g honey Oat Porridge (81 g oats boiled in 307 g H2O until thick, then cooled) Toasted Oats (122 g oats toasted in a dry skillet, tossing often until lightly browned, cooled) 38 g whole wheat flour 471 g bread flour Autloyze 30 minutes add 18 g salt and 20 g water Ferment 3- 4 hours.  Dough is *very* sticky.  Divide in 2 balls and let rest 30 minutes.  Shape loaves.  Roll loaf on wet paper towels, then roll in oats spread on a cookie sheet.  Place loaves in sprayed pan (or in banneton) to proof- about 1.5 hours for me. Bake 400F.  The loaf pan version took about 40 minutes.  As mentioned above, I removed them from the pans about 20 minutes in to toast up the crust all around.  :-)
Decided on upping the starter to 150 so... Starter 150g Water 300 Flour 225 AP/225 BF 12g of salt Mixed it all up, let it rest for an hour Looked at it and folded it every 2 hours for 6.5 hours Wonderful marshmallow texture when I put it in the bowl Let it go in the fridge for 22 hours Baked at the usual 450 for 500, I did forget to dunk the parchment paper in water. 123 the III
Lovely recipe by Stanley Ginsburg from his site theryebaker.com Stage 1 sponge (day one, morning): Left to mature for 10-12 hours. Stage 2 sponge (day one, evening): Covered and left to stand overnight for 10-12 hours. Final Dough (day two, morning): Mixed, portioned out into loaf pan (2/3rds full) and final proofed for 3-5 hours till it reached the rim and the top showed numerous bubbles. Brushed with water and baked at 225°C till ready (60-70 minutes). Thank you Stanley. Notes: 1. Quite high percentage of salt. If we include the cracked rye then it comes in at 2.6%. If we don't (as it's not exactly flour) then it comes in at 3.9%. I did make too much dough so put aside 200g ish to make a rye roll and when I had it with peanut butter (which does have a little salt) it's a tad too salty. Still a lovely tasting bread all the same but if I were to repeat it I think I'd drop the salt %. 2: Interesting enough the salt is added into stage 2 of the recipe making it 6% in the preferment. We're always told that salt will inhibit the activity of the starter. However the preferment rose very well indeed!
I decided to bake Hamelman's 5 Grain Levain in a tin and mix in some AYW.  This was in an attempt to get more oven spring, and prevent sagging sides.  I used 20% AYW of total water, and shaped (somewhat unsuccessfully) for a tin.  The result was quite pleasing, but I suspect the tin resulted in a slightly gummy crumb, so next time I will remove the loaf and bake free-form for the final 10 minutes.  I also used baking spray on the loaf top to prevent the plastic bag from sticking during retard.  This resulted in a very dark top crust, which I will "pass" with my next bake. Joe
Since I started my new job in the big city I have not had a lot of time to bake.  Last weekend I found enough time to whip this one together.  I used mostly freshed milled and sifted flours for this bake and added a little KAF Bread flour for some extra strength.  I have grown to love adding cooked rice to the bread.  You don't taste the actual rice but it adds a great texture to the crumb and helps promote softness as well.  The ricotta cheese also helps create a soft and moist crumb which this one certainly had. This one makes a perfect sandwich, grilled bread or simply some toast with cheese or butter.  The nutty flavor of the Spelt goes great with the whole wheat and makes a flavorful bread. I used black smoked sesame seeds for the top to give it a little extra flavor. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files . Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, Ricotta Cheese, rice and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I made these loaves based on the San Joaquin recipe by dmsnyder, but I upped the whole grain content to 50% (mostly wheat, but also a significant amount of rye), and raised the hydration (by an unmeasured amount, but it ended up feeling higher than I had intended). I only cut one of the loaves so far, but as you can see, the crumb was pretty irregular. Is this a sign of a particular part of the process I can improve on? Proofing? Something else? Or is it just normal variation? It seems a little too drastic for that last option.The bread was light and delicious, but I wondered if this might point to something I can improve upon, which could then make it even better.Thank you! Pics of the whole loaves are below. I am very much still working on scoring (and this dough was wetter than what I'm used to), but I was mostly pleased with the way the scores came out.
Table of Contents for my BLOG Typically I follow Teresa Greenway’s (Northwest Sourdough) formula and process for my Sanfrancisco Sourdough. It produces the flavor profile that I like best. Her process entails an extended warm ferment coupled with a normal warm proof. The warm fermentation develops a bread that favors lactic acid and is very smooth, intensely flavored, and non-vinegary. For over a year I have experimented with changes to the formula/process in an attempt to either improve the flavor or alter the timeline. Almost all attempts have failed. I simply can’t beat her formula and process for the most part. My latest tweak - I bulk fermented the dough for 14 hours @ 78F and then transferred to the retarder. The retarder was set to 51F. The idea behind this experiment is to shorten the warm BF by fermenting overnight @ 50-51F. So I can mix at 7AM and retard @ 9PM. I ran a digital thermal log in the retarder. I had previously learned that the dough takes a very long time to cool from 79F to 50F. And even longer if the target dough temp is 38-39F! Because the warm BF was shorten and an extented (overnight) retard with a target temp of 50-51F was utilized, the flavor profile of the bread shifted noticeably. The bread now has a slight vinegar note that comes from the acetic acid. This was to be expected, but is now confirmed. Why I don’t divulge the formula or process in detail. In the process of taking Teresa’s course we became friends. I asked permission to post her formula and process on TFL. She preferred that I not, because her course is a source of income for her and her family. I plan to honor that as I would if anyone else asked me to do the same. I have no baking secrets, but then again I don’t feed my family from my bakng endeavors. If anyone is interested to try her method of SFSD (I highly recommend it) the course is only $12.99 and it is worth a whole lot more... Danny
San Francisco Sourdough from Larraburu Brothers as described in https://www.aaccnet.org/publications/cc/backissues/1978/Documents/chem55_461.pdf as interpreted by David Snyder February, 2019 Over many years, there has been much interest in reproducing the San Francisco Sourdough bread baked by Larraburu Brothers' bakery that closed in the early 1970's. The article referenced above seems the most likely to accurately report Larraburu Brother's method. The following formula and methods have been extracted from that article, with a very few modifications as noted. Because of the current interest on The Fresh Loaf in this, I will post this “plan” now and update it with my own results when I have actually baked bread using this method. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Bread flour (12% protein) 924 90 High gluten flour (14% protein) 100 10 Water 612 60 Salt 20 2 Total 1656 162 Note: I used King Arthur Flour AP flour (11.7% protein) and Sir Lancelot flour (14% protein). Sponge Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High gluten flour 100 100 Water 50 50 Active starter 50 50 Total 200 200 One day before baking the bread (e.g., before going to bed the night before you want to bake) Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flour and mix thoroughly. Knead until all the flour is moistened. Place in a dry bowl and cover. Ferment at 80ºF for 9-10 hours Remove 50g of the fermented sponge and refrigerate for future use. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bread flour 924 Water 562 Salt 20 Sponge 150 Total 1656 Procedure In a large bowl or the bowl of a stand mixer, mix the water and sponge cut in pieces to soften the sponge. Mix the salt into the flour and add it to the mixing bowl. Mix the dough at slow speed to thoroughly mix the ingredients, then at medium speed to obtain medium gluten development. (A medium window pane.) Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover and let rest at room temperature for 1 hour. (Note: The article does not specify the temperature for this step. I think room temperature is most likely.) Divide the dough into two equal pieces. Pre-shape as balls. Cover with a cloth and let rest for 10-30 minutes to relax the gluten. (Note: The 10-30 minute rest after pre-shaping is my addition, but it is “standard operating procedures” in most artisan bakeries.) Shape the pieces as boules or bâtards and place, seam-side up, in floured baskets or on a linen or parchment couche. Proof for 4 hours at 105ºF in a humid environment. (Note: I place the formed loaves in bannetons and place the bannetons in food safe plastic bags and clip them shut. Then, I proof the loaves in a Brød & Taylor proofing box.) One hour before baking, preheat the oven with a baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Transfer the loaves to a peel and score as desired. Bake at 420ºF for 40-50 minutes (per Galal. I baked at 460ºF with steam for 15 minutes, then at 450ºF convection for 25 minutes.) The oven should be steamed for the first 15 minutes of the bake. The loaves are done when thumping the bottom gives a “hollow sound,” the crust is nicely browned and the internal temperature of the loaves is 205ºF. Cool thoroughly before slicing. David
The following are links to our Community Bakes Below are tips & ideas that I find useful For those in the US and others, the History of King Arthur Flour Company is very interesting and historic. Although not listed as a tip, the comparison of whole grain wheat may prove interesting for some. I am trying to use a Table of Contents for my BLOG. Links to blogged bakes will be posted to this page. I plan to post a link to this page on all BLOG bakes, experiments, tips, Community Bakes, etc..
The following easy meat recipes cater for a wide variety of tastes and skills. The meat-roll (essentially a meatloaf) and the lover loaf is really easy. The stuffed leg of lamb may require a little more skill from the cook. When we get to the Mexican pork chops and the baked pork chops we are back to very easy. All of these easy meat recipes are very tasty and suitable for entertaining as well as every day cooking. Spoil your family with something a little different. Meat-roll with Apricot filling Ingredients: Filling Method: A few pieces of bacon may be place over the meat roll if preferred. Serve with rice or potatoes and any of your favorite vegetables. Tasty Liver Loaf for an Informal Party Ingredients: * 1 lb liver (beef, pork or lamb) * 2 small onions * ½ lb sausage meat * 1 cup finely crushed corn flakes * 2 eggs, well beaten * 1 slice bacon * 1 tsp Worcester sauce * 1 Tsp lemon juice * 1 tsp salt (or more to taste) * ½ tsp celery salt * ½ tsp pepper Method: 1. Cover the liver with one cup boiling water and simmer gently for 5 minutes. 2. Drain reserving broth. 3. Put liver and onions through mincer. 4. Add sausage meat, corn flakes, seasonings and eggs. 5. Add enough broth to moisten slightly, mix well, pack mixture into a greased 8"x 4"x 3" pan. 6. Place bacon on top and bake in moderate oven (350deg.F) for 45 minutes. 7. Serve hot or cold. Stuffed Leg of Lamb with Honey Glaze Ingredients: * 5-6 lbs boned leg of lamb * 2 oz flour * ½ tsp. salt (for gravy only) * ½ cup honey * 2 cups water Stuffing * 2 ½ cups breadcrumbs * ½ tsp salt * ¼ tsp freshly ground black pepper * 2 Tsp melted butter * 1 egg * 1 cup chopped parsley * 1 cup chopped celery * 1 cup chopped green peppers * 1 tsp chopped fresh dill (optional) * Mint and garlic to taste Method: 1. Sprinkle the inside and outside of the leg of lamb with salt and pepper. 2. Combine the breadcrumbs, the parsley, the celery and the green peppers together with salt, black pepper, dill (if chosen), mint, garlic and the melted butter. 3. Add the egg and mix together. 4. The stuffing is a little crumbly – add another egg or some stock if you prefer a firmer mix. 5. Pack into the cavity in the leg of lamb and sew up the slit to encase the stuffing. 6. Roast in a moderate oven, (300 – 350 deg, F) till done. 35-40 minutes per pound. 7. Half an hour before serving, baste with honey, turning oven down to 250 deg. F. 8. Remove from pan and keep hot. 9. Stir the flour into the pan drippings and stir in the water. 10. Add salt and bring to the boil, stirring till thickened. 11. Pour into gravy boat and serve. 12. Remember to remove the string before serving. 13. Serve with rice, baked potatoes and vegetables of your choice. Serve 6-8. Pork Chops Mexican Ingredients: * 6 pork chops * 1 cup tomato purée * 2 Tsp minced or chopped onion * 1 Tsp Worcester sauce * 1 tsp chili powder or 1/8 tsp cayenne pepper * ¼ tsp cinnamon * 1 tsp pepper * A dash of ground cloves * 2 Tsp flour * 2/3 cup water * 3 dessertspoons vinegar * 1 tsp salt * 1 tsp paprika Method: 1. Wipe chops with damp cloth and dust with flour. 2. Sear in smoking fat on both sides until brown. 3. Meantime put tomato purée and water in a saucepan and add the remaining ingredients in the order listed. 4. Mix well and bring to the boil. 5. Remove each browned chop with a fork and dip it in the boiling sauce. 6. Then place in a baking dish which has a thick cover. 7. Pour the remainder of the sauce over chops, cover and bake slowly at 350 deg. F. for 30 minutes. Serve with potatoes or rice and vegetables of your choice. Baked Pork Chops Ingredients: * 4 large pork chops * 1 lb peeled potatoes * 1 cooking apple * ½ tsp dried mixed herbs * 6 oz carrots, turnips or parsnips * 2 small sliced onions * Salt and pepper to taste Method: 1. Slice potatoes thickly and lay them on foil down centre of a baking tray, season with salt and pepper. 2. Lay chops on top of the potatoes and season again with salt, pepper and herbs. 3. Peel and core the apple; slice and lay on top of the chops. 4. Slice the carrots, turnips or parsnips and lay on either side of the chops. 5. Place sliced onion on top. 6. Wrap foil carefully over the whole dish, seal it and bake at 350 deg. F.(Gas 6) for 1/1/2 hours. 7. Serve with rice and a green salad. With these four easy meat recipes you will be learn to cook tasty meat dishes with ease. You will be able to impress your friends,child and all family with your cooking skills and it will remain your secret that it is actually easy meat recipes anyone can make.
I decided the time had come for a little experiment to try and shed some light on the dark art of bulk fermentation and the influence different percentage volume increases might have on the final loaf.I started with a pretty standard dough recipe as follows: Initial mix    10% wholegrain emmer flour    10% emmer flour sifted #40    80% bread flour    7.7% prefermented flour @ 56% hydration    0.15% diastatic malt    75% hydration (69% + 6% bassinage)    1.8% salt   Process       20 mins autolyse + 10 mins fermentolyse    Add salt, then malt    Mix 2 mins LS, 2 mins HS (Famag)    Add bassinage on lowest speed    Bulk ferment at 25C (see below)    Preshape to 2 x 900g, BR 20 mins    Shape to 2 batards    Overnight retard in fridge    Morning bake at 230C with steam for around 30 mins.Bulk Ferment Details    1st bake:     Coil folds at 1hr & 2hr    Duration: 5hrs 05min    Volume increase: 71%        2nd bake:    I had to go out during most of bulk time, so I was only able to do one coil fold at 20 mins, so I increased HS mix time to 2mins 30secs    Duration: 3hr 55min    Volume increase: 40%    Differences Both bakes produced good loaves, but with some differences:1st bakemore spread on the peelless loftless oven springmore open crumb2nd bakekept its shape better on the peelmore loftmore oven springslightly less open crumbbrowned quicker in the oventook slightly longer to cook First bake: Second bake: Summary It appears that there is flexibility in bulk volume increase, as you would imagine, but you can expect differences in the final loaves. These differences will no doubt become more pronounced if higher percentage volume increases are allowed to happen. Lance
Table of Contents for my BLOG Bake1 Once again I am trying to successful bake the famous Larraburu SD. All other attempts have failed miserably. I am using David Snyder’s formula and process based on the Galal, Johnson, & Varriano-Marston paper. The 50% Levain was fermented at near 80F for 10 hours. The image below was taken at the end of fermentation. My digital PH meter is stored away, so at the last moment I decided to test the PH of the fully fermented levain with a PH strip. NOTE - the PH is shown on the left side (darker) of the strip. Left image was taken after the gluten was developed. It was kneaded by hand. A machine was not used for this bake. The image on the right was taken after a 1 hour BF at 80F. Below the dough was photographed right before the final prrof. Below is the dough after a 4 hr proof at a target temp of 105F. I am very pleased with the outcome considerating abuse (hot fermentation) that the dough with stood. The bread was over proofed, but with a 4 hr proof at over 100F, what else could we expect? The flavor was fairly prominent and smooth. The flavor profile had no sharp or vinegary notes. The texture was moderately soft and enjoyable, IMO. If it wasn’t for Teresa’s SFSD, I would be attempting to tweak this more in order to make this a favored bread. Question for those that have tasted the original Larraburu SD. How would you describe the crumb? Did it resemble the crumb above, that we now consider to be over proofed? Conclusion - Teresa Greenway’s SFSD is by far the very best version of Sanfrancisco Sourdough that I have eaten.  I prefer a bread that is intensely flavored. But keep in mind, I have never sampled the real SFSD. Danny For those interested. HERE is the link for the interactive thermal data chart that was run during the fermentations. UPDATE - The bread staled in one day. Both the flavor and the texture degraded in 24 hours. I am thinking that the relatively short fermentations produced a loaf that staled in short order. <Bummer>
San Francisco Sourdough from Larraburu Brothers as described in https://www.aaccnet.org/publications/cc/backissues/1978/Documents/chem55_461.pdf as interpreted by David Snyder February, 2019 Over many years, there has been much interest in reproducing the San Francisco Sourdough bread baked by Larraburu Brothers' bakery that closed in the early 1970's. The article referenced above seems the most likely accurate report available of Larraburu Brother's method. The following formula and methods have been extracted from that article, with a very few modifications as noted. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Bread flour (12% protein) 924 90 High gluten flour (14% protein) 100 10 Water 612 60 Salt 20 2 Total 1656 162 Note: I used King Arthur Flour AP flour (11.7% protein) and Breadtopia's "High Gluten Bread flour (14% protein). Sponge Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High gluten flour 100 100 Water 50 50 Active starter 50 50 Total 200 200 One day before baking the bread (e.g., before going to bed the night before you want to bake) Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flour and mix thoroughly. Knead until all the flour is moistened. Place in a dry bowl and cover. Ferment at 80ºF for 9-10 hours Remove 50g of the fermented sponge and refrigerate for future use. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bread flour 924 Water 562 Salt 20 Sponge 150 Total 1656 Procedure In a large bowl or the bowl of a stand mixer, mix the water and sponge cut in pieces to soften the sponge. Mix the salt into the flour and add it to the mixing bowl. Mix the dough at slow speed to thoroughly mix the ingredients, then at medium speed to obtain medium gluten development. (A medium window pane.) Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover and let rest at room temperature for 1 hour. (Note: The article does not specify the temperature for this step. I think room temperature is most likely.) Divide the dough into two equal pieces. Pre-shape as balls. Cover with a cloth and let rest for 10-30 minutes to relax the gluten. (Note: The 10-30 minute rest after pre-shaping is my addition, but it is “standard operating procedures” in most artisan bakeries.) Shape the pieces as boules or bâtards and place, seam-side up, in floured baskets or on a linen or parchment couche. Proof for 3-4 hours at 105ºF in a humid environment. (Note: I placed the formed loaves in bannetons and place the bannetons in food safe plastic bags and clip them shut. Then, I proofed the loaves in a Brød & Taylor proofing box.) One hour before baking, preheat the oven with a baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Transfer the loaves to a peel and score as desired. Bake at 460ºF for 15 minutes with steam, then at 450ºF Convection bake for another 25 minutes in a dry oven. The loaves are done when thumping the bottom gives a “hollow sound,” the crust is nicely browned and the internal temperature of the loaves is 205ºF. Cool thoroughly before slicing. Notes for future bake: Relatively dull crust suggests either over-proofing, insufficient steam or both. The crumb was well-aerated, demonstrating adequate fermentation, but quite dense. It was essentially identical to other loaves I have baked with 50-60% hydration doughs. There is no danger of your jam falling through big holes onto your lap with this bread! The flavor was that of a French pain au levain - sweet and wheaty with only the subtlest lactic acid overtone. There was essentially no acetic acid tanginess. It's good white bread but not anything I would identify as "San Francisco Sourdough." I could fiddle with the hydration and flour mix, I suppose, but I am not optimistic about the basic method ever hitting the target. David
It was time to redo this one as it is one of my favourites. Recipe is adapted from Sarah Owens. Recipe Makes 3 loaves of ~ 885 g unbaked boules Oat Soaker 245 g Rolled Oats 480 g Boiling Water Dough 800 g Unbleached Flour 200 g High extraction Spelt Flour (230 g Spelt berries) 540 Water 726 g Soaker 80 g  Honey 22 g Salt 30 g Yogurt 250 g Levain Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day I love this recipe. Even though I tweak it each time i make it, it never fails to give me big, beautiful loaves!
This time I went for something a little larger, as I'm getting very satisfied with the outcome of these breads using a 12 hour autolyse. I also added a little fennel for the aroma. Second time with this and once again, smelled of vinegar as dough in the morning and as baked bread. Final Ingredients   2.4 oz   Starter: 100%H Sourdough, Fed separately 12.0 oz      Flour: Hard Red Wheat K.A.F. 10.2 oz     Water: Cold, Filtered  1-2  tsp      Salt: Fresh Cracked Sea Salt ~1/4 tsp  Fennel: Dry McCormick Seeds ProgressionThurs.    ~21:00   Levain: Take Starter (Abuelito) out of the fridgeFriday      ~7:00                Feed Starter              ~19:30                Feed Starter                          Autolyse: Mix Flour, Water and fennel in covered bowlSat.         ~7:30  Ferment: Add Starter, then salt, on dough, between stretch and folds. Cover             ~20:00                  Degas, stretch and fold. Re-cover             ~21:30                  Degas, stretch and fold. Re-coverSunday     7:00                  Degas, stretch and fold. Re-cover                 7:40 Preshape: Move dough to counter, fold 4 times and place seam side down                 7:45      Shape: Gently tighten, tucking dough underneath                 7:50                  Place same side up in proofing basket. I line a loaf pan with damp paper towels. Cover                 9:50                  Preheat oven, with whole Dutch Oven inside, to 450F. Uncover Loaf               10:00                  Transfer bread, cover, place in oven.                               +30 minutes: Remove from Dutch Oven, leave in Oven.                               +15 minutes: Remove from oven Inoculation: ~9.7% final dough weight.        Dough Weight: 24.8 Pre-Baking, 20.5 Post-BakingFerment: 24 hours at room temp. 68 F.       Proof: 2.0 hours at room temp. Baked for 45 minutes -----
Thank you David (dmsnyder) for the inspiration. Saw your bake and had to try it myself. Saturday Morning 11am: Freshening Fermented for 6 hours at 26°C (78.8°F) Saturday Afternoon 5pm: Basic Sour Fermented for 16 hours at 23°C  (73.4°F) Sunday Morning 9am: Full Sour Fermented at 29°C (84.2°F) for 3 hours. [Recipe advises 85°F but my yoghurt maker only goes up in whole numbers using °C but it's very close and because it's a large amount of sour that's well insulated I think it would have been higher anyway. Recommendation was 3-4 hours but it was super active and smelling wonderful after just two hours. Stretched it to 3 then went onto the final dough] Sunday Afternoon 12pm: Final Dough [reduced the recipe by 20% to make one big loaf instead of two loaves and kept the remainder sour which I added back to my starter] Method:
It's been a long last year and my starter - Charlie - has been pretty neglected. I'm finally getting back into baking some nice bread. I didn't have any whole wheat flour in the house, so made a Tartine basic country loaf using unbleached locally milled bread flour.  I used coil folds instead of stretch and folds inspired by Trevor's technique. During bulk the structure really seemed to develop well.  I gave it a fourteen hour cold retard and baked it this morning. It had a beautiful oven spring - it easily doubled. The interior structure still doesn't look as uniform as Trevor's but I'm very happy with it. The dough was nicely moist, soft and the loaf had lots of spring as I cut it.  Being Italian I was, of course, bred on bread since 1965!  My mom inspired my love of bread.  And as it's all fresh and I'm missing her, I'm dedicating this to #mom...
Ah that cheese! Emmental cheese mushrooms fusilli bake Italian dinner: yellow datterini tomatoes & grilled zucchini with aged balsamic, honey lemon roasted chicken with red onions, (over-stuffed) pepperoni & mozzarella pizza, salmon pasta in white wine cream sauce, and chopped salad with tomato camone (super tasty!!), yellow bell peppers, cucumbers and lettuces
So I scored these breads all from the same batch of dough. As you see the ear on the one is so nice but in the others my scores seem as though the dough is over fermented. These came out of the fridge and into the oven. Any thoughts?
Polish Milk Rye (chleb z mlekiem) from The Rye Baker, page 309.  It uses  a wet rye sponge as well as commercial yeast and has 60% medium rye (home ground and sifted), 40% bread flour, eggs, milk, molasses, and caraway seeds. It's was a fast developing dough that shaped easily with gentle handling.  It's tasty and has quite a subtle flavor and would go with practically anything.  I can't recall working with a dough with such low hydration (~60%) since I started making sourdough.
Mixed Grain Sourdough Bread March, 2019 David M. Snyder After the disappointing attempt to replicate Larraburu Brothers' San Francisco Sourdough Bread, I needed solace. The best cure for failure is to get up and do better. I had recently had a nice message exchange with Dan Larsson, a very talented young Swedish baker. He posted photos on Instagram of a gorgeous loaf that was 20% fresh-milled Einkorn flour. In response to my questioning, Dan said Einkorn added a lot of good flavor and also speeded up fermentation. (It was not clear that was an Einkorn or just a whole grain flour effect.) Anyway, I decided to formulate a sourdough bread with 20% Einkorn just to see what I thought. I happened to have a bag or Einkorn berries, and I milled some fine Einkorn flour with my Mockmill100 for this test. Total dough Bakers' % Wt (g) AP flour 79 480 Whole rye flour 2 11 Whole wheat (Einkorn) flour 19 118 Salt 2 12 Water 75 457 Total 177 1078 Note: I fed my starter with a flour mix consisting of 70% All Purpose flour, 20% Whole Wheat flour and 10% whole rye flour. I pre-mix these flours and keep them in a large, air-tight glass jar to use as needed. A typical pre-mix batch would be 280g AP + 80g WW + 40g Rye flours. Note: For this bake, I used home-milled Einkorn flour for the “Whole Wheat flour” in the Final dough. Starter1 Bakers' % Wt (g) Flour mix 100 40 Water 50 20 Stiff starter 25 10 Total 175 70 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flour blend and mix thoroughly until the flour has been completely incorporated and moistened. Ferment at 76ºF for 6 hours Starter 2 Bakers' % Wt (g) Flour mix 100 100 Water 50 50 Stiff starter 20 20 Total 170 170 Reserve 50 g of the ripe Starter 1 for another purpose. Dissolve 20 g of the ripe Starter 1 in the water. Add the flour blend and mix thoroughly until the flour has been completely incorporated and moistened. Ferment at room temperature for 5-6 hours. Refrigerate overnight. The next morning, let the starter come to room temperature during the autolyse. Final dough Wt (g) AP flour 400 WW Flour 95 Water (85ºF) 401 Salt 12 Stiff levain 170 Total 1078 Method Mix the flour and water at low speed until they form a shaggy mass. Cover and autolyse for 90 minutes Add the salt and levain and mix thoroughly. Form the dough into a ball and place the dough in a lightly oiled bowl and cover tightly. Ferment at 76º F for 31/2 to 4 hours with a stretch and fold in the bowl at 30 minutes and 60 minutes and a stretch and fold on a lightly floured board at 90 minutes. Divide the dough as desired or bake as one larger loaf. Pre-shape as round(s) and rest, covered, for 10-30 minutes. Shape each piece as a boule or bâtard and place in a banneton. Place banneton in plastic bags. Proof at room temperature (68-70º F) for 1-2 hours. Do not over-proof. (My loaf was very puffy after 1 hour.) Cold retard overnight. The next morning, assess the degree of proofing. The loaf may be ready to bake or need additional proofing. Act accordingly. 45-60 minutes before baking, pre-heat the oven to 500º F with a baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Score as desired. Bake at 460ºF with steam for 15 minutes, then for another 25-35 minutes in a dry oven. (Optionally) Turn off the oven, and leave the loaves on the stone, with the oven door ajar, for another 15 minutes. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack, and cool thoroughly before slicing. I did not note that fermentation was any faster than usual, compared to other doughs with similar proportions of whole grain flour. I did note that the dough seemed less absorbent than usual, but then I have been baking breads that, most often, have at least double this proportion of whole grain flour. On the other hand, there was amazing oven spring, and I don't think the loaf was under-proofed .... at least not by much. The crust was crunchy, but becoming chewy. The crumb was tender-chewy. The flavor was wonderfully balanced with a prominent lactic acid mellow sour and just a touch of acetic acid tang. Lovely! We had some for dinner with Joe's Special. For those not in the know, this is a very traditional San Francisco specialty invented by the long-closed New Joe's Restaurant, which was right on the Northeast corner of Broadway and Columbus in the heart of North Beach. It is a scramble of onions, ground beef,  spinach and eggs. It might have garlic. I seasoned it with salt and pepper only.  I added sautéd mushrooms. Some inauthentic versions add wine.  Very delicious hot or cold. Happy baking! David
There is a graph going around which compares the growth of yeast to LAB across the temperature range.  The yeast being compared is C. milleri.  What disturbs me about this graph is that people interpret it as being the only yeast relevant to their sourdough.  It's not. C. milleri is not the dominant yeast species in ANY of the 567 sourdough samples genetically analysed by the http://robdunnlab.com/projects/sourdough .  However, a lot of research has found C. Milleri to be present in the most powerful starters. Most of the older sourdough samples (the best and most well known) are dominated by the famous and well known Saccharomyces cerevisiae. S. cerevisiae has been studied quite a lot, and its temperature dependent growth is fairly well studied and modelled [1][2][3][4]. I include a much better graph for this yeast (the upper solid line marked "Sc" is Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  The lower dotted line is irrelevant). I think both yeasts are relevant.  The optimal temperature for maximizing your starter's leavening capacity [Edit: probably not, too many complicating factors, especially LAB competition] probably depends on what temperature you've been keeping it at (and thus the balance of yeasts), but I would expect it to be around 29-30C, which is damn good for both of these yeast varieties. [1] Cheung et al., 2015, The Effect of Temperature on the Growth Rate of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. [2] Mensonides, F.I.C., Schuurmans, J.M., de Mattos, M.J.T, Hellingwerf, K.J. and Brul, S. 2002. The metabolic response of Saccharoymces cerevisiae to continous heat stress. Molecular Biology Reports, 29: 103-106. [3] Authur, H., and Watson, K. 1976. Thermal adaptation in yeast: Growth temperatures, membrane lipid, and cytochrome composition of psychrophilic, mesophilic, and thermophilic yeast. Journal of Bacteriology, 128 (1): 56-68. [4] Salvado, Z., Arroyo-Lopez, F.N., Guillamon, J.M., Salazasr, G., Querol, A., and Berrio, E. 2011. Temperature adaptation markedly determines evolution within the Genus Saccharomyces. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 77 (7); 2292-2302.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3067424/
The French typically use 10-17% rye flour and T80 flour for the rest. Here in New Zealand I have limited choices.  But I have a flour mill.  So I've been making a flour close to T110 as follows: I calculated the extraction rate by weighing the final flour (734g) versus the original wheat (835g), giving 88% extraction rate.  This is in line with French T110 flour, so I will assume it has an ash content of around 1.1%. On the market I can buy either High Grade flour (11.5% protein, similar to American All Purpose flour), or Plain Flour (10% protein).  I purchase the former from a reputable brand (Champion).  I presume it is akin to French T55 flour, which has an ash content around 0.56%. Mixing these two flours in a ratio of 1:1, I get an ash content of 0.83%, which is smack dab in the middle of T80 flour's ash content. I'm rather chuffed. So my final mix is: Since my breadmaking goal is to simply have one starter and one bread that I settle on, and then focus my efforts elsewhere, I'll be using this flour both to feed my starter and to make my bread. Happy baking everyone!
A while ago Joze created an amazing version of Maurizio's 50/50 during a community bake which I loved doing at the time ..http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/56967/50-wholewheat-community-bake-jozes-version I wanted to have another look at cold bulk as I can bulk ferment dough for let's say 5 loaves or more without the need to have a retarder or fridge to host all the bannetons...so cold bulk overnight and then pre-shape, final shape, ambient proof and bake is my aim... Joze's shaping approach is a bit like a ciabatta and I wanted to change it a bit more into a loaf that I could score... So.. 25g liquid starter, 50g WW Shipton Mill Canadian WW, 50g Marriages Organic Strong White 7:00 and was ready at 12:00 after 5 hours.. AL 9:00 - 400g Shipton Mill Canadian , 400g  Marriages Organic Strong White and 560g water 12:00 Add levain and flour, 60g water - Rubaud 12:30 Add 18g salt and 60g water dough temp 25C and slap and folds until almost fully developed not quite yet... Then into proofer at 80F and three coil folds at 30 min and there was some nice activity and fermentation along side creases from last fold were still slightly visible..ready for the fridge, I thought... Put in wine cooler at 4C 15:00 Took dough out at 7:00AM  and dough temp was 6C...I know my wine cooler does not quite give me the accurate temp..always a bit warmer.. Pre-shape with cold dough and surprised to feel air in it... 45 min bench rest Final Shape and into banneton - and then room temp proof for one hour and 15 min...This is the bit where I always  loose my nerve! Can I go longer? Not to unhappy with the result but wonder to try similar approach with a stiff leaven from my 100% starter and what difference I get in taste and dough strength... If anyone has some great references or tips for cold fermentation, plesae let me know... Happy baking... Kat Dough when put into wine cooler..after 3 X 30 min folds Dough coming out of wine cooler in the morning after 15 min, dough temp 6C and hate to prick the chap... Dough straight out of wine cooler before pre-shape pre-shape of cold dough scored..
I baked 2 loaves of DMSnyder's SJSD and they disappeared overnight.... so decided I'd make something that at least seemed more healthy. I broke out the Hamelman Bread book and started browsing.  Several hours later (serious) I settled on Sourdough Seed Bread, I had all the ingredients on hand and it seemed like it would be delicious. I ended up tweaking the recipe a little bit to incorporate some freshly milled grains, and I think it turned out pretty well!  I am also bad at following instructions, and my KA mixer made the dough pretty warm at the start, but no harm done! Prepared the Levain from 1oz NMNF starter with 4.8 oz AP flour and 6 oz Water the night before. (it took around 12 hours to be bubbly and ready -  I have never done a one step levain build like this, but we were desperate and out of bread, so I forged on. At the same time made the soaker with 2.2 oz flaxseeds and 6.7oz water.  Both Levain and soaker sat overnight on the kitchen counter. The next morning I mixed the dough: (I am glad my scale will change units to oz from grams or I'd have been in trouble here, or doing a lot of math to scale down from bakery sized measurements) Soaker, Levain 1lb AP flour and 8.6 oz freshly milled hard white, 2.6oz dark rye, 3.8 oz toasted sunflower seeds, 1oz toasted sesame seeds (all I had - the recipe called for more) 11.3 oz water and .7oz salt.  Threw them all in the bowl of the Kitchen Aide and mixed for a bit, it looked very dry so I added a smidge more water and set the timer for 4 minutes.  At 4 minutes the dough was 86 dF Yikes!  a little warm.... Bulk Ferment - 2.5 hours on the counter with one fold in the middle somewhere. Divide and shape into 3 loaves - put in bannetons and retard in fridge about 21 hours. Removed from the fridge and they were like bricks, so I left them on the counter and went to Yoga class.  Came back (about 1.5 hours) turned the oven on and loaded into Dutch ovens. Baked 25 minutes lid on at 475 and 20 minutes lid off at 450dF.  It smells divine and looks pretty good too!
This is today's daily bread...made with rolled oats fermented overnight with levain and water before being mixed into a rye/spelt/Marquis wheat dough along with some chopped almonds; shaped loaves were dusted with sifted bran and some sesame seeds, cold proofed overnight and baked this morning direct from the fridge in pre-heated DOs.
San Francisco Style Sourdough Bread March, 2019 David Snyder This recipe was kindly shared by Ann Rogers who got it from Mike Giraudo. Mike's recipe is his own adaptation of that of Ramon Padilla,who worked for 30 years as a baker for Parisian and Boudin bakeries in San Francisco. These are the instructions she provided verbatim, followed by my adaptation, reformulated to make 1000g of dough. ------------------------------------------ Mike Giraudo's Recipe (per Ann Rogers) 250g starter (60% hydration)600g water1000g flour20g saltMakes two 875g loafsMix all ingredients 2 minutes on low speed until mixed, then mix 9 more minutes on next level speed. Then a quick stretch and fold, rest dough 30 mins, then stretch and fold one more time. Then cover and let dough rest for about 8 hours at room temp. After 8 hours, divide and shape into loafs and then into bannetons or lightly oiled containers, cover- then into the refrigerator for at least 12 - 32 hours. (The longer the time, the more sour the bread)After refrigeration, place immediately into a pre-heated Dutch oven @475 for 20 mins and then uncover and cook for another 10 mins @450 (or until you like the color of your bread.) Feel free to use all purpose flour, makes for a great crumb. ------------------------------------------- David Snyder's Adaptation Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Total flour 617 100 AP 463 75 WW 154 25 Water 371 60 Salt 12 2 Total 1000 162 Note: The original recipe and the San Francisco Sourdough of yore are 100% low extraction (white) flour. I have modified this by including 25% whole wheat flour, because that is my preference. Besides effects on flavor complexity and nutrition, the anticipated effects would be: 1) A less open crumb, 2) faster fermentation, 3) enhanced acid production. Note: 15.7% of the flour is pre-fermented. This is less than most sourdough formulas which average 20-25% pre-fermented flour. The effect would be: 1) A longer bulk fermentation, 2) more acid content at the time of dividing and shaping. Starter Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Total flour 84 100 AP flour 63 75 WW flour 21 25 Water 50 60 Active firm starter 21 25 Total 155 185 Note: The 21g of active firm starter consists of 7g water + 10g AP flour + 3g WW flour. The night before mixing the Final Dough, dissolve the active firm starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Cover and ferment at room temperature overnight. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 390 WW flour 130 Water 313 Salt 12 Starter 155 Total 1000 Procedures Place all the ingredients in the bowl of a stand mixer. Mix at Speed 1 for 2 minutes to distribute ingredients then for about 9 minutes at Speed 2 to develop the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Do one stretch and fold. Cover the dough and let it rest for 30 minutes. Do one more stretch and fold and transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment at room temperature for “about8 hours.” Divide the dough, if smaller loaves are desired, pre-shape into rounds and cover. Let rest for 10-30 minutes. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Refrigerate for 12-32 hours (The longer the cold retardation, the more sour the final loaf). Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 20 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 10 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 20-35 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Time depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. Note: I retarded this loaf for about 15 hours. At the end of that time, it was nowhere near adequately proofed. I placed it in my proofing box set to 80ºF and proofed it for another 2.5 hours, the last hour while my oven pre-heated. You can see from the overly exuberant oven spring and bloom that the loaf was still somewhat under-proofed. I baked it on a pizza stone, as described in Step 12., above, for a total of 50 minutes. I had a couple slice ... well, three ... but one was very thin! The crust was delightfully crunchy. The crumb was pretty open for a 60% hydration, 25% whole grain bread. It was very well aerated, demonstrating good fermentation. The crumb was moderately chewy. The flavor was a bit wheaty and sweet with a moderately prominent acetic acid tang, yet well-balanced. It has the old-fashioned San Francisco Sourdough feel - the genuine article. It's just what I would imagine Parisian "Wharf Bread" to have been like, if they had baked a "whole wheat" version. I shared my results with Ann Rogers and Mike Giraudo, and Ann reiterated that, if I wanted it more sour, I should just extend the cold retardation to 32 hours (or more!) I am going to do it. This is a keeper. It is the bread I have been trying to make for many years. I would encourage those who miss the San Francisco Sourdough Bread of yesteryear or just wonder what all the fuss is about, to make this. It's simple and easy and delicious. Happy Baking! David
Let me share with you this nice flavored sourdough that came out of the oven this morning. It uses a mix of bread flour (65%), whole wheat and rye. I milled WW and rye in the blender, but did not sift out any bran this time. The formula proportions are listed below. The levain was prepared 12 hours prior to mixing the dough. I also autolysed the WW + rye for the same amount of time. The kitchen was about 17C throughout the day, so I just left the autolyse to happen on the counter and added all salt together. Since I did not sift the bran out and the blender yields a courser flour, autolysing the WW + rye is a good idea. Autolyse + levain prior to mixing the final dough After mixing the final dough and applying the usual S&F process (4 sets), I left the dough bulk fermenting on the counter for a total of 9 hours (including S&F) at about 16C overnight. In the morning I shaped the dough into a small batard and put in the fridge for an hour before loading it in the oven to bake for 30 min with lid on + 5 min with lid off (all preheated). Everything came out so fine with nice crumb and good crust. I have been playing with long retarded bulk fermentation and short final proofing. Even though I have not retarded the bulk fermentation in the fridge, I think the long BF on the counter in a cool kitchen had a similar effect, whereas the short proofing kept me away from the over proofing problems. It is incredible how many possibilities there are available for baking a loaf of bread. Even though I do not follow this procedure under a normal situation, it has been good to feel the dough and have some control on the results.
It’s been ages since I last baked a porridge loaf so I’ve decided to bake one again. This is the first time I worked with amaranth flour. I went for bagged flour since it’s 4 times cheaper than buying the grains and grinding them myself… Despite that, its flavor has really surprised me.
I am tinkering with different flours and methods and one of them is to develop gluten for my weekly handmixed 4kg batch as close to a window pane as I can.....without having a mixer for now... Carole aka DesigningWoman kindly recommended some videos from the Ecole International de Boulangerie for 'petrissage manuel en masse' which is basically manual mixing with folding and slap and folds...BUT I love in particular what he does when he divides and layers the dough pieces during slap and folds... https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FkvjdqkZWqg I also used Shipton Mill Swiss Dark Flour for the first time (and as it was said to be low on gluten) mixed it with their strong Canadian flour. Here are my loaves: Luckily I made a 'spare' one to check out the result as all the others were given away and one  in particular bloomed amazingly and made my day..... I also find that cinching gives me a more open crumb and as the bulk rise went to at least 80%ish  as I was running late in a meeting it was a hell of a proofy dough... Happy baking.... Kat
The aroma is unbelievable! Made with Stoates (Whole Spelt) and Marriage's (Superfines) Flour, tap water (pH 7.8) and sea salt. Refresh (aka levain) 4 hrs @ 30C50g LM (from bath)50g Stoates Whole SPelt15g water= very firm 45% est. hydration. 400g flour (50% Spelt, 50% white)111g LM as above280g water9.5g salt10g olive oil Bulk 2hrs @ 28C Shaped, not moulded/freestanding and proved until triple (proper triple!) 5hrs@ 27C. Update: A few more pictures including crumb.
Inspired by the Community Bake a month or so ago, I decided to take a stab at Hamelman's Five-Grain Levain recipe.  This turned out to be a really delicious bread, which my wife likes a lot too, and there will be more loaves baked in the future. For the Liquid Levain, I used my trusty starter (50 g), bread flour (250 g), and water (313 g).  I could not find any cracked rye easily available, so I ordered some rye chops online.  (Question for those who baked this loaf: Where can I get cracked rye?)  The Soaker then became rye chops (92 g), flaxseeds (92 g), sunflower seeds (77 g), oats (77 g), salt (6 g), and water (406 g).  Even though Hamelman states in his book that boiling water is not needed if rye chops are used instead of cracked rye, I opted to boil.  The oats were a generic kind that my wife microwaves for breakfast each day (i.e., nothing special). The Final Dough consisted of bread flour (500 g), whole wheat flour (250 g), most of the liquid levain (563 g), the soaker (all), some instant dry yeast (1 tsp), salt (18 g), and water (261 g).  I included the yeast because I wanted the finished bread to be available by mid-afternoon.  In addition, my kitchen was 68dF, the levain and flour were 66dF, and the soaker was 64dF.  Even with 110dF water the dough temperature turned out to be 72dF at the end of some vigorous mixing by hand. Vigorous mixing indeed.  After five minutes, there was still some dry flour in the bottom of the 12-quart Cambro tub, and my hand was encased in a glop of various seeds and wet sticky dough.  Eventually I managed to keep flopping the dough mass around until all of the dry flour became part of the mass, at which point I began some serious pinching and twisting of the dough to get some good gluten development ensured.  I also wanted to be certain that all of the various ingredients were somewhat evenly distributed, which I suspect is much more easily accomplished with a stand mixer.  On the other hand, this is a pretty sturdy dough that would challenge the motor of my KitchenAid, and I tend to use it only for things like ciabatta.  After a few more minutes I concluded that nothing much more was going to be achieved other than wearing out my hand and arm, so I stuck my Thermapen into the dough, recorded the 72dF dough temperature, and put the lid on the tub. I went with Hamelman's forty-five minute rest before doing a set of stretch-and-folds, but with a cool kitchen I figured that a bit more time of bulk fermentation might be needed.  After another seventy-five minutes things looked right for pre-shaping.  The dough by then had expanded nicely, and several looks at the bottom of the tub revealed a nice collection of bubbles forming in the dough.  Pre-shaping was smooth, and as can be seen, a twenty minute bench rest saw only a little flattening (definitely no pancakes -- this is a rugged dough). Typically I make two loaves, one baked in a Dutch oven, and the other on a baking stone.  Both began at 460dF.  After twenty minutes I removed the lid on the Dutch oven, and that loaf (the boule) went for another twenty-nine minutes.  (Heeding Hamelman's admonition to bake fully because of the increased hydration, I checked the internal temperature several times and was a little surprised to see how long it took even to reach 200dF.  In the end both were around 208dF.)  For the batard on the stone, I dropped the temperature to 435dF after thirty minutes and then had to put an aluminum foil tent over the loaf at the thirty-three minute mark. The batard baked for a total of fifty minutes.  These loaves were hefty too, weighing in at 1145 g for the batard and 944 g for the boule. We put the boule into the freezer, but ate some of the batard for dinner.  Here is a crumb shot. Many thanks to Danny for organizing the Community Bake, without which I wouldn't have baked this bread so soon.  Thanks also to those who posted in that thread, which I read in part several times and which provided helpful information.  Next time I will likely omit the instant dry yeast, and I will incorporate cracked rye if I can locate any without too much trouble.  For someone who usually bakes bread composed of the four basics (flour, water, salt, and starter), this was an interesting experience in handling a dough with multiple add-ins and different characteristics.  The reward was the pleasure of tasting a new bread.  Albeit my participation in the Community Bake was a bit belated, I hope that someone who has not yet made this bread might find some inspiration too and realize one of the benefits of being on TFL.
http://www.gadgetify.com/mecs-tech-ultrasonic-knife/ Have to get one of these for sure!
It's been awhile, and this entry is more to try and keep track of what's been baked lately. After my third shot at the Hamelman five-grain, I went back to my usual formula, but adding the Hamelman-style hot soaker. One of the loaves actually made it down to Burgundy, where spring had put in an early appearance, as in all of France that week. Taking a page from Ian Finding myself with a batch of overcooked brown basmati rice, I decided to try adding some to my dough, along with a grain and seed soaker. And because it seemed a natural thing to do with basmati, I also grated in some fresh turmeric, which gave the dough a lovely color and interesting perfume. I made two loaves, but never got to taste any, since grandson was not only heading off to Brussels to see his girlfriend, but also down to Lyon to see his brother. He was kind enough to send a crumb shot and to describe the crumb as "dense, but voluptuous". So, thanks Ian! Revisiting an old friend Many months ago, Abe taught me how to make a do-nothing bread, and it was one of those midweek, off-the-cuff bakes. I added a handful of seeds, but cannot for the life of me remember if I added a soaker. Probably not, since I was unsure of what would happen to it during the overnight, room-tempertaure bulk ferment. Which brings us to this weekend's bake. Camargue red rice with multigrain seeded soaker Since I never got a chance to taste the rice loaf, I made some extra Camargue red rice a couple of nights ago, and actually wrote down what I was going to do: 130g of 3-stage 100% hydration WW levain, starting with 10g of rye seed at 66% 100g of cooked Camargue red rice Soaker:65g toasted multigrain flakes20g flax seeds15g nigella seeds110g boiling water2g NaCl 320g T65 bread flour200g T150 whole-wheat flour 364g water 10g NaCl I was curious as to what a "young" levain would do, compared to the usual "mature" one, so I did the first build on bake day -2, and made the soaker in the same evening. Sifted the bran out of the whole wheat (came to about 12g), and added it to the soaker, with 9g of water (that I forgot to deduct the next day when making up the dough!). Bake day -1, built the second stage before heading to work, then stage 3 when I got home. Let that bubble up for about three hours, made the dough, mixed in the levain and let it sit for an hour or so. Then added the soaker, rice and salt. The dough felt lovely before adding in all of that stuff. Lots of pinching and folding before a long session of SLAFs. Two sets of STAFs half an hour apart, then into the fridge (about 3:30am) for an overnight snooze. (And while I was waiting around, decided that I'd also make a batch of yogurt cake with a tweak; I'd read somewhere that it was possible to swap out yogurt for starter. Since I had a little levain left over and a small handful of semolina that was bugging me, I made up 130g of semolina levain and put it aside.) On bake day, removed the dough from the fridge and let it warm up for about three hours, turned it out onto the counter and did a pre-shape, 45-minute bench rest and final shape. Coated the loaves in seeds and plunked them into their baskets. The dough had been quite cold, so I reckoned that the final proof was going to need some time. I did remember to stick a small lump of dough into a little container to keep an eye on the rise. In the meantime, made up the yogurt cake batter, then dithered about whether I should bake the cake first (which had the advantage of heating the oven partway and providing desert), or hold off on the cake until the bread was done, whenever that would be. Opted for the former. Oh, the suspense! Would the cakes be baked and the oven heated up enough before the bread overproofed :-D This batch made a dozen and a half of these little cupcakes; they were supposed to include toasted walnuts, too, but I ate them all while I was making the batter. And I simply forgot to sprinkle over spme flaked almonds or blond cane sugar… oh, well, we ate them anyway. The sourdough added a nice flavor to these apple/prune yogurt cupcakes. The loaves finally went into the oven when the little lump of dough had risen by about 25%, I'll try going for longer the next time. The flavor of the rice really comes through, especially when the bread is toasted. Crumb is soft and moist, crust is a little chewier than usual, but good. It'll be interesting to see the shelf-life of this loaf. One of the things I love about the soaker, aside from the flavors, is the fact that the crumb stays soft the whole week. Amazing. Next stop, CedarMountain's fermented oat soaker! While I was building the levain for this bake, CedarMountain posted a gorgeous loaf using a fermented soaker, adding a bit of starter to a "standard" hot-water soaker. I'll try to keep notes this time! Two questions Can anyone help me figure out the hydration of this loaf, based on the numbers above? I get all befuddled when there's a soaker involved. I have two sets of baskets, both of about equal width; one is about 24cm long, which works quite nicely for loaves of about 700-750g of dough, and a pair of smaller ones that work well with about 500-550g. These loaves were in the neighborhood of 630g and could have been smooshed into the smaller baskets, but I decided to give them room to grow and used the longer ones. Would proofing in the shorter baskets have forced the bread to rise higher once it hit the oven? Just realized: my starter is a year old this weekend! Thanks, Debra Wink!
Everyone loves cinnamon raisin bread but I was leery of making some because of the negative effects of cinnamon on yeast. This is a shot at it adapting the recipe from Bourke’s Bakery Spiced Fruit  loaf. Makes 3 loaves of about 845 g raw weight INGREDIENTS 700 g unbleached flour 200 g high extraction Durum flour (Mill 230 g Durum berries and sift. Save the bran for the levain.) 650 g filtered water 180 g golden raisins (or sultanas) 180 g Thompson raisins 40 g plain yogurt 50 g honey 16 g ground cinnamon 20 g salt 465 g of 3 stage levain (100% hydration)(Procedure in recipe) Extra bran and AP flour to feed the levain. The afternoon before: The night before: Dough day: Baking Day This first batch was done with the shaping method described above. I have a second batch about to go into the oven where I shaped doing the “cinching” method to see if there are any differences in the result.
This weekend I baked my recent go-to Sourdough ft. my own starter (he's called Steve and is a 100% hydration rye starter). Happy baking!
Really happy with the crumb! Open and so tender.no sourdough tang at all with the YW influence. Very dominant flavor from the oats. Will definitely be trying this again. WI have Cedarmountain to thank for the idea of fermenting the soaker. I added 80 grams of my AYW to the rest of the water for an overnight fermentation. I used two levains both fed with Red Fife, one my SD starter and one my YW starter both are usually fed unbleached. The oatmeal was flaked on my new Marcato flaked. The next morning the oatmeal was wonderfully fragrant. I used some milled spelt and the rest unbleached  flour the oatmeal and the two levains. The dough was let to rest after mixing everything including salt  for two hrs. Only needed one s&f to be really poofy. I did one more s&f 30 min later just to see how it would feel.... beautiful satiny dough. In one more hour it had doubled.. yikes! My YW is so active I should have been more careful. I shaped gently dough,  was full of bubbles and really light. Retarded overnight so about 16 hr. Had really risen as you can see. Baked at 475 covered for 15 and then uncovered for 20. The crumb shot will be tomorrow. The loaves are so light and big and the area where I scored is glossy and beautiful. I can hardly wait to taste. (Sorry the pictures out of order... darn phone!) Glossy crumb Ready for the oven Whoa.. overproofed Ready to retard Ready to shape Ooops doubled! After autolyse:
A few shots of the bread meet I attended in New York last Monday. It was big fun. Daniel Leader liked my bread. here is the loaf that I made with Farmer Ground Bread Flour.
Common sense suggests to tweak bread recipe variables one at at time so as to be able to better isolate and understand the effect of each variable. That is my usual practice but this was a "let's try all this and see what happens" weekend bake. First of all, I received two flour sifters last week and decided it was time to get serious about milling and sifting my own high extraction flour.  With that in mind I decided to bake a variation of Chad Robertson's Tartine 3 "Ode to Bourdon" bread.  My bread is a mix of 500 g high extraction Marquis wheat /250 g whole grain Red Fife flour/ 250 g whole grain spelt/rye flour (substituted for the white whole wheat flour - I was hoping this would also balance out the hard red wheat flour). The autolyse was 3 hours at room temperature, 87% FDH.  I opted for a young levain to moderate what I expected to be a vigorous bulk ferment with all the whole grain flours; some of the sifted bran was used for the levain and some for coating the shaped loaves.  Bulk ferment was 3 hours; cold proof 10 hours. And then the second tweak, after reading the recent post comments by Filomatic, Kat and Carole about Ecole internationale de boulangerie instructional videos, this one caught my attention:  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sn0INYBr1fA.  As Filomatic appreciated, there are some serious lame/blade skills on display but what intrigued me most was the explanation about the relationship between scoring and crumb structure. I decided to add yet another tweak to this bake and tried several of the scoring methods described and demonstrated in the video.  It's not as easy as the instructor makes it appear and my results were mixed, to say the least!  The boule opened up nicely, almost like the one in the video; my batard however looks completely random with only a slight resemblance to the example in the video.  Interesting to note the crumb structure is very uniform though.  And the bread tastes really good so it doesn't bother me as much that it doesn't have the same esthetic appeal as the Ecole internationale de boulangerie bread, just need more practice, more baking.
One of my favourite baked goods is a crusty and seedy roll, perfect as a sandwich or eaten open-face like the Germans do. Once again I tried to increase the nutritional content by using Spelt rather than white flour, and by adding a chia and flax seed soaker. I added SD starter for flavour, but also used yeast because I was baking the same day. These tasted great and were a good balance of chewy and fluffy on the inside. The recipe below made 8 rolls, but if you want them larger just divide into 6 rather than 8. The hydration is quite high so the dough is messy, but this improves the texture. If you prefer denser rolls I would decrease the hydration slightly. I start the soaker and simultaneously autolyse flour and water for 30 min. Then I add the remaining ingredients (except for the topping) and knead in KA on low speed for approx. 10 min. I let the dough rest and proof with an occasional S+F for 3 hours or until doubled in size. Spelt flour prooves quickly, so keep an eye on it. I preheat the oven as hot as it'll go, for me that 240 celsius. I turn out the dough, divide into 8 and let rest 10 or so minutes. Using a fair bit of flour on the work surface, I shape the rolls and try to build some surface tension by dragging them towards me with the bench scraper. They will look a bit flat, but there's a lot of oven spring once they bake. I spritz the rolls with water and top liberally with the seed mix, patting it in as I go. Once they're all seeded, I add some quick slashes (although this isn't neccessary). I bake at a high temp with steam for 25 min, then another 8 min without steam at a lower temp (180 C).
I haven't contributed for a while, this is a s/d loaf using Caputo Italian flour Type 0 that has recently become available at the local Supermarket its a Manitoba Ora. On the label it says it is well suited to long fermentation times. The dough was inoculated  with 10% s/d culture and the formula worked out for a 750g dough piece. flour 436g salt 9g s/d culture 44g water 262g i added 262g of water to the 44g of s/d culture and 262g of the flour and bought this together and let it sit for 1 hour, i then added the rest of the flour and the salt and mixed to a nice dough this was left to bulk ferment overnight for just under 10 hours  it was then knocked back and  handed up and allowed to rest for half an hour it was then shaped and placed in a banneton for just under 3 hours it was then placed in a dutch oven and baked at 220C with the lid on for 20 minutes and lid off for a further 20 minutes. The result was a loaf with a bit more tang than usual and a good mouth feel long after it had been swallowed. Overall quite happy with this flour as it works out at $A3.00 a Kg when buying the 5 kg bag
I used my 'cheat' sourdough starter for this one. It is reasonably quick because it uses yogurt and a 1/4 teaspoon of instant yeast and makes a fair volume of starter. The recipe stated 180g of starter refreshed with 80% wheat and 20% rye flour.  The bread is made with coconut water and also contains grated coconut. Slow rising, it sat in the fridge overnight for its first rise and I finally baked it the next evening. I love the way the aroma of the coconut takes over the kitchen when you toast it. We took the final slices with us when we went hiking in the mountains.Recipe from Bake-Street.com
The recent flurry of chatter about SFSD, Larraburu Bros and Galal et al. highlights curious issues about the terroir of bread.  It occurs to me that bread has a staggeringly more extreme element thereof than wine, cheese or olive oil.  Forgive me if this is obvious and widely acknowledged.  These are new(ish), or at least somehow suddenly more deeply considered, ideas for me.Whereas it almost takes a bonafide Supertaster to distinguish olive oils from adjacent Ligurian communes, or wines from neighboring Côtes de Rhone estates, almost anyone could distinguish my bread from that made from the same formula and process by my next door neighbor.  Why is this so?  Why is it that bread baking constitutes such a complex nexus of powerful intersecting and interacting factors dictating its outcome as to render each of our products as unique as our respective human genotypes?  I'd wager that even the gentlest nudges of nuture would prevent identical twins from producing indistinguishable breads in a single kitchen.  There's also the inevitable stochastic fuzziness inherent in any bread formula and process not executed by precison-tuned robots.The utter personal uniqueness of our baked products is manifest every day in the TFL bread browser.  It fascinates me that, from the images, I can pick out a dabrownman, isand66, Danni3ll3, David Snyder, Alfanso or Elsie_Lu bread without having to click the link.  Ok, part of that arises from my conditioning vis a vis the same lighting and cameras in use.  But our breads are like our fingerprints or signatures - no two alike.  It'd be the same as my handing identical pens and paper to all the above bakers and asking them to forge Floyd's scribble of "The Fresh Loaf".  Each would be utterly distinguishable.  Add time, temperature, microbial, ingredient and equipment variation to that and reproducibility flies right out the window.   Are we hopelessly trying to "forge" Larraburu bread? :-)Danny's community bakes are another example of 1000 flowers blooming from clonal seeds. Granted, everyone there is really encouraged to express her/his own personal take on a common formula, not to reproduce an ideal to the letter.  It's more an exercise of "lets all explore this space", which is the fun and flavorful fascination of it (thank you Danny!).  Yet it would be an interesting variation if everyone was actually encouraged, in a future community bake, NOT to stray from a strictly prescribed formula and process.  I don't have to tell you the outcome(s!) we could expect.  One upshot of this line of thought is the utter futility of trying to accurately reproduce the character of Larraburu's legendary holey :-) grail.  Please don't get me wrong.  I'm not writing this to troll or diss the efforts eliciting the lively discussion and investigations currently @TFL.  On the contrary.  Just publicly ruminating about it.  We all bake (and braise and grill and stew) guided by a vision, often derived from an image in a cookbook or on a website or TV show.  The memory of a cherished bygone flavor is a powerful and worthy windmill for our personal tiltings.  I certainly do.  We all do.  Go for it.But given the above musings about the utterly uniquely personal terroir of baked bread, how could any non-Larraburu bakehouse alumnus today possibly reproduce the flavor of a bread that was baked half a century ago at a particular bay area location with particular (mostly unknown, forgotten, scrapped) equipment with a long lost menagerie of microbes, an unknown or effectively extinct water, flour and salt supply, vessels, ambient temperature and humidity by sets of long retired, dead and mostly forgotten hands, eyes, noses and tongues?  How surprising is a result like, "the worst bread I've baked in a decade?" :-)  Well actually, a little.  But maybe that speaks to the immense scale of the challenge of trying to crack the code of bread terroir.  Maybe its quietly telling us You Shall Not Pass.So why is a bread's character so exquisitely expressive of terroir?  Flour x Water x Salt x Yeasts x bacteria x time x temperature x humidity x hands x vessels x countertops ...?   Fill in some numbers (and factor in the barely knowable nonlinear interactions of those variables) and it becomes combinatorially astronomical.  And convincing.  Here's a hypothesis:  Acceleration, amplification and diversification by high heat.  Wine, cheese and olive oil don't get cooked at 500˚F during production.  Afterward in the kitchen perhaps, but not in the making.  As Michael Pollan has pointed out (highlighting research and scholarship by others), cooking over fire may have accelerated human evolution.  Maybe it's the heat of our ovens that is primarily responsible for launching our breads off in the zillion different directions represented by the endless diversity of our finished products.  But that's probably only a small part of it.Or maybe it's just that when it comes to wines, cheeses and olive oils, there are only so many orchards, vineyards, pastures, caves, and (increasingly, worryingly, genetically uniform) plant and animal breeds on the planet.  But there are 8 billion of us, each built and driven by 20k genes represented by gazillions of alleles.  Neither us nor our kitchens are clones.  How could we expect our breads to any more uniform than we or they are?Thanks for listening, if you've made it this far.  Over to you.  Got bread to bake.Tom
A few weeks ago I attempted a bake using corn flour, inspired by Dutch style soft corn bread. It's basically a soft fluffy bread good for toasting, baked with a hint of corn flour for colour and flavour. Anyway, I felt like baking buns and decided to incorporate some corn. Ingredients: Method: Overall they tasted great but were a tiny bit dense. I also should have taken them out of the oven 2 or 3 minutes earlier, the tops went a bit dark but still tasted good. Recently I've been adding a tiny pinch of yeast to my bun doughs to get a lighter texture, in future I think I'll keep doing that. Happy baking!
In December 2018 I tried to duplicate the delicious breadsticks we had at one of the Arizmendi bakeries in S.F.  I think that I came close after a few tries, eventual swapping out the somewhat invisible-tasting sharp cheddar and jalapeño for pecorino cheese and serrano chilies.  Converted in this iteration from sponge to a 100% hydr. levain with 20% preferment AP flour, it is a 50/50 semolina/AP dough at 69% hydration.  I also removed the sugar and IDY which was used in the sponge. Friend Mike made a short notice visit and is staying here these past few days to take care of some East Coast business that had cropped up pronto.  So I baked these baguettes for him as well as some ciabatta. Using the similar but converted formula as I did for the breadsticks, the baguettes came out looking fine in every way.  But...I don't believe that this formula is really designed for anything other than a breadstick.  The crumb is quite dense, likely due to the very finely grated 25% pecorino cheese in the mix, and there is "too much" cheese flavor that was better left when the crust was much more the star than the crumb. Something was lost in the transition from breadstick to baguette.  Much better as toast than as fresh bread.  So noted, and in the future I'll stick to just using the formula for breadsticks. And a little ciabatta "skin"
I have always loved the smell of fresh baked bread.  It holds a special place in my imagination.  Up until a year ago, my forays into bread baking was limited to a bread machine and a store bought package.  Last spring I attempted to create my very own sourdough starter.  It took a couple of tries, but eventually I was successful and had a very lively culture, all lovely and bubbly. Then I began accumulating assorted items to pave the way for baking good sourdough bread: a 5 quart dutch oven, two proofing baskets, a lame for scoring my loaves, a bench knife and dough scraper and a large clear plastic container for doing bulk fermentation. I have done a number of attempts at the process.  Each time was a learning experience.  Some new bit of information would come to light and I would note it and add to my knowledge.  Trial and error can teach you alot. But my most recent attempt, I followed Chad Robertson's Tartine Bread Country loaf recipe with some success.  I took from my refrigerated starter 40 grams and added 100 grams each of King Arthur's Bread Flour and water.  This was early in the morning just before I left for work.  When I got home that evening, my levain was ready to go with a sweet smell to it.  I had the young starter he advocated. I used 1000 grams of Bread Flour, 750 water, 200 starter and 20 salt.  I used Autolyse (rest) method, allowing it to rest and absorb the water with three turns every half hour. My only hiccup in the whole process was in the shaping of the loaves.  Up until this time, I was used to working with dough at 60 or 65% hydration.  this was 75%.  I found that when I would try to create the tension in the dough's surface, it would only tear and not truly hold its shape.  I forged ahead, placing the two loaves in my baskets and refrigerated them overnight.  The next morning I fired up the oven to 450 degrees F and baked them 35 minutes with the lid on the dutch oven and then removed the lid and baked another 20 minutes.  The results were good for a first attempt.  However my crust was not as burnished as I would have liked.  I am thinking my folds should have been double to build the gluten enough for my shaping.
Steve Giraudo, whose family owned the company that ultimately controlled Parisian, Colombo, Toscano and Boudin bakeries, sent me links to a couple youtube videos that document the history of those companies. Note that Larraburu was never part of this consortium.  Given the recent interest in SF SD, I thought these would be of interest to many TFL folks. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U2gKnjbQiRI This one is parts of a couple TV programs, one with a brief biography of Steve's father, who started baking SF SD in 1935 and ended up owning all the remaining old time bakeries. This is before Acme, Tartine and the new generation. That's another story for another day. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a2PVBJdsbs0&t=5s Enjoy! David
Sourdough Bread Based on the method of Ramon Padilla March, 2019 David Snyder Ramon Padilla is a retired baker. From 18 years old until he retired, he baked for the Parisian Bakery and the Boudin Bakery in San Francisco. He was the baker responsible for the fabulous sourdough bread served at The Tadich Grill. He told me he baked it at Parisian until they closed and then at Boudin. Today, his brother is head baker at Boudin and still makes the bread for The Tadich Grill. In retirement, Ramon has continued to bake bread at home. Ramon very generously shared the way he bakes bread currently. Interestingly enough, it has some similarities and some differences compared to the published account of the Larraburu method. The most striking similarity is the very short bulk fermentation and very long proofing. The biggest difference is that Ramon's entire process is at room temperature. He did tell me that getting the dough temperature right is an important consideration. He neglected to tell me his DDT (desired dough temperature). I have modified Ramon's formula and procedures in a few ways, to suite my taste and schedule. His formula calls for all white flour – high gluten for the starter and all purpose for the final dough. I substituted in a bit of whole wheat and whole rye. Ramon does a long (over 8 hour) final proof at room temperature. In order to fit my schedule and in order to increase the acetic acid production, I proofed at room temperature for a shorter time, then cold retarded the formed loaves and proofed further at a warm temperature before baking. This is an experiment for me. It is not unlikely I will make modifications after seeing how this bake turns out. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % Total flour 1000 100 AP 799 80 High-gluten flour 101 10 WW 50 5 Rye 50 5 Water 600 60 Salt 20 2 Total 1620 162 Note: The original recipe and the San Francisco Sourdough of yore are 100% low extraction (white) flour. I have modified this by including 10% whole grain flour, because that is my preference. Besides effects on flavor complexity and nutrition, the anticipated effects would be: 1) A less open crumb, 2) faster fermentation, 3) enhanced acid production. Note: 15.7% of the flour is pre-fermented. This is less than most sourdough formulas which average 20-25% pre-fermented flour. The effect would be: 1) A longer fermentation/proofing, 2) more acid content at the time of dividing and shaping. Starter Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-gluten flour 101 75 WW flour 34 25 Water 81 60 Active firm starter 34 25 Total 250 185 Note: The 34g of active firm starter consists of 13g water + 16g AP flour + 5g WW flour. The night before mixing the Final Dough, dissolve the active firm starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Cover and ferment at room temperature overnight. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 783 WW flour 11 Rye flour 50 Water (warm) 506 Salt 20 Starter 250 Total 1620 Procedures Place all the ingredients in the bowl of a stand mixer. Mix at Speed 1 for 2 minutes to distribute ingredients then for about 9 minutes at Speed 2 to develop the dough. Final dough temperature was 76ºF. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Do one stretch and fold. Cover the dough and let it rest for 30 minutes. Do one more stretch and fold and transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment at room temperature for 1hour. Divide the dough into two equal pieces, pre-shape into rounds and cover. Let rest for 10-30 minutes. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons or on a couch, seam-side up. Cover and let proof at room temperature until 75% proofed (6.5 hours for me at 68ºF). Refrigerate (cold retard) for 12-32 hours. (The longer, the more sour the bread will be.)* If you think the loaves need it, proof at room temperature for additional time before baking. Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 20 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 10 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 20-35 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. * To test the expectation that a longer cold retardation would produce a more sour loaf, I made two loaves. One was baked after 18 hours in the fridge a 2 hours more at room temperature. The other was baked after 22 hours in the fridge and 3 hours more at room temperature. Both were baked on a baking stone, as described in Step 13. The first photo is of the loaf that was retarded for a longer time. The photo below is of the bread retarded the shorter time. The following photos of crust and crumb are from this second loaf (the one retarded for a shorter time). The first of these loaves - the one cold retarded for 18 hours - was sliced and tasted when completely cooled. The crust was very crunchy with a nutty flavor. The crumb was cool and chewy. It had a somewhat sweet flavor with a lactic acid-type acidity predominating. It had a hint of acetic acid tang only.  Among the variations of San Francisco Sourdough, this bread was considerably closer to Acme's than to the Parisian/Tadich Grill style. Excellent bread. The morning after these loaves were baked, I tasted each. The first loaf's flavor had not changed overnight. The second loaf which had been cold retarded a few hours longer had pretty much the same flavor profile but with just a bit more of an acetic acid tang. Wheaty and lactic acid flavors predominated. These are very good breads. I especially like the very crunchy crust. I think that is the result of the low hydration. I haven't decided where to go next with this series of experiments. I wonder if keeping a firm starter going for a few weeks would encourage heterofermentative lactobacilli to grow and result in more acetic acid flavor. Happy baking! David
Bread these days is much maligned.  The Paleo diet people think grains were a mistake.  The low-carb people think carbohydrates are the root of all evil.  And the gluten scare mongers imagine they all have celiac disease.  Even mainstream dietitians warn of the high glycemic index of bread.  What is a baker to do? Many of these folks can't be convinced otherwise. They've accepted their beliefs about grains, carbs, or gluten in a kind of religious shared-delusional way that is impossible to argue against because it's not logical. But for those reasonable people who do follow and understand argumentation I write this blog entry explaining each problem or supposed problem, and how it can be fixed. The Paleo Complaint: Phytates and Lectins Paleo people are quick to throw out words like "lectins" and "phytates" and they all seem to know that bran contains phytates and that phytates suck nutrients out of your intestinal tract and they get flushed down the toilet.  Fair point. Well, white flour doesn't have any phytates because it doesn't have any bran.  Even most wheat flours have some of the bran sifted out.  Better yet, the sourdough process neutralizes almost all of the remaining phytates.  And even if you aren't doing sourdough, simply soaking your flour partly neutralizes the phytates by activating phytase, the enzyme that breaks down phytate. As for lectins, they are ubiquitous in nature, practically everywhere.  But both cooking and fermentation break these down. In sourdough bread we do both. Low Carb and Keto Diet People I don't have much mitigating advice for these folks. Bread is not low carb or ketogenic.  They can still remain in ketosis with 50 grams of carbs per day, and that allows a small amount of bread. But it's probably best avoided in this case. Gluten Let's face it.  Less than 1% of people have Celiac disease.  And most people who seem to be gluten intolerant haven't done rigorous studies to determine if the culprit is actually gluten.  The culprit might be (in my opinion) bran from unsoured bread.  After all, health people insist on eating whole wheat, but many don't realize that whole wheat is technically poisonous (depending on your definition of poison) if the phytates aren't dealt with.  So gluten is, in my humble opinion of course, probably not the problem.  Most of these people are experiencing the powerful force of what is known to researchers as the placebo effect.  Many gluten-sensitive people who try sourdough find that they don't have the same reaction. Glycemic Index So we come to the last complaint on the list. This is he most scientifically accepted complaint, and this is also the one I think we can do the most about. [EDIT: and if you're not diabetic and you eat in moderation, don't worry too much about the glycemic index] Regular white bread has a high glycemic index.  But that can come down in a number of ways. While we are on the topic of seeds, many are saying they are a super food. What better way to get your seeds than in a loaf of bread? In summary, for the health conscious, a sourdough bread with lots of seeds and with some butter or oil spread on it is probably the best prescription. I'm currently bulk fermenting such a loaf.  I'll post pictures and the recipe if it turns out nice.
I am a new user of this amazing machine. Being a chefin a professional capacity, I am perplexed with how many of you use the machine. I am not one to add water first (liquid) for the doughs, now I have made several batches od various breads in the Ank, and my recipes are tried and true, and now come out better becasue I can actually get the gluten to activate unlike the KA machines. So, I add all my flour and 3/4 of the water until I see if humidity plays a factor, and my baguette recipe, I dont hold back anything, but I also am using a 100% hydration poolish, and a little water. It was gorgeous when it finished. So, is there a reason why y’all put the water first, as opposed to the flour? I do not mean to step on toes or make anyone who is passionate about this upset, but I know people have their reasons, I just want to try to understand the concept. Thank you.
Table of Contents for my BLOG I recently bought a grain flaker and some organic oat groats. By the way; fresh rolled oatmeal (porridge) is very good and nutritious in the morning. The obvious evolution was Oatmeal Porridge Bread. This is my first ever bake of this kind. I elected Maurizio’s Oat-Porridge SD for my first attempt. The high percentage of gluten free oats was very unfamiliar to me. The dough was sticky and hand kneading (mostly coil type folds) was fairly sloppy. I omitted the 25 grams of hold out water, and I am glad I did. I BF the dough to approximately 50%, which in hind sight was too much. The dough was shaped, placed into cloth lined bannetons, and retarded. Since the room temp dough takes hours to cool down in the frig, the dough rose considerably. Next time the BF will be cut back to no more that 30% increase. 12 hours after BF the doughs were removed for the frig. They were gassy. One was scored, the other not. I have never tasted a bread like this before. It is definitely not sour, has a soft texture, and the flavor is interesting and good. I think it will make a great sandwich bread. I am please with the crumb, except for the dense area near the bottom of the loaf. I am interested in improving this bread. Goals for improvement would be; Please share your suggestions and ideas for improvement. Danny
As I mentioned previously, Abe taught me many months ago about do-nothing bread -- I think it was to help me get over (yet another) failed bake. This was ostensibly foolproof and painless. I believe it's based on Teresa Greenway's overnight sourdough, which in turn might have been based on Yoan Ferrant's do-nothing, 16-hour bread. In any case, Abe gave me an easy-to-remember formula, and I've used it faithfully for the occasional midweek bake, when running low on bread. I'd been afraid to tweak, fearing dire consequences of any variation during the course of the 12-14 hours of bulk ferment, although occasionally swapping in 10-20% of something other than white flour. But last week, I did make two changes at the same time: swapped in 10% whole wheat, and added a handful of seeds. While the loaf lacked in loft, the crumb was good, although less flavorful than, say, the Hamelman 5-grain levain. But also much less hands-on. Having been recently converted to soakers, I'd wondered about, but was afraid of, adding a soaker into the mix. Wasn't sure what having the stuff ferment overnight in the dough would do. Then CedarMountain posted his fermented oat loaf. Well, if he could ferment his soaker overnight, how terrible would it be to add a soaker that would ferment with the dough? So I refreshed my starter and poured 100g of boiling water over 50g of rolled oats. When the fomer was nice and active and the latter had cooled, I took 20g of one and all of the other, mixed them up with 500g flour (T65 bread flour with 15% T150 whole wheat), 350g water and 10g NaCl, covered and left overnight on the counter, with one set of folds before going to bed about four hours after mixing. Very poofy, proofy, sticky dough the next morning. Turned it out onto the counter and gave it a couple of sets of letter folds about 30 minutes apart. By then the dough became workable and tacky, rather than sticky. And too slack for me to shape as tightly as I would have liked. Gave the loaves a coating of nigella seeds and plopped them into baskets. A couple of hours later, preheated the oven, turned the loaves out into the roaster, spritzed, slashed, spritzed and baked covered for 20 minutes, then 20 minutes open. Like I said, I had trouble shaping these, but considering how slack the dough was, I'm pretty satisfied with them and will continue to work on shaping. Next bake: something with a CedarMountain fermented oat soaker. And maybe some dried fruit and cinnamon…
I've been asked to teach a class on bread. It will be whole grain, as that is what I usually bake. What do you think would be the best starting place. My daughter thinks that my usual process of soakers and biga's and sour dough etc will scare beginners. I just tried the Basic Whole Wheat Bread recipe from The Laurel's Kitchen Bread Book with good success, but it doesn't have the flavors of the longer ferments. Opinions?
Sourdough Bread March, 2019 David Snyder My recent trials of sourdough bread production methods have made some very good breads, but still not exactly what I want. I recall that, about 10 years ago, I baked some breads from a recipe developed by a home baker who was an active participant on The Fresh Loaf at the time, “Susan from San Diego.” At the time, I felt it was the bread I had baked closest to my ideal. So, I thought I would return to that bread, applying some procedures I had adopted with good results since that time. Of note is that Susan's recipe called for two builds of firm starter before mixing the final dough. As I recall, it produced a rather sour, crusty loaf with a moderately open crumb. Back then, I mixed the dough with a stand mixer. For this bake, I mixed by hand. I made two loaves. One, I cold retarded for 17 hours then left at room temperature while the oven pre-heated. The second loaf was cold retarded for 40 hours. I was eager to see whether the second would be much more sour, as one would expect. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 125 11 AP flour 803 69 Whole Wheat flour 138 12 Rye flour 92 8 Water 826 71 Salt 23 2 Total 2007 173 Starter 1st Build Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 18 75 Rye flour 6 25 Water 12 50 Seed starter (liquid) 6 25 Total 42 175 Dissolve starter in water. Add flours and mix thoroughly. Ferment at 76ºF for 8 hours. Proceed to 2nd build or refrigerate 1st build overnight and continue the next day. Starter 2nd Build Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 104 75 Rye flour 35 25 Water 69 50 Starter 1st Build 42 25 Total 250 175 Dissolve starter in water. Add flours and mix thoroughly. Ferment at 76ºF for 8 hours. Note: If not ready to make the Final Dough when this starter build is ripe, the starter can be refrigerated for up to 3 days, until you are ready to proceed. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 803 Whole Wheat flour 138 Whole Rye flour 50 Water 743 Starter 2nd Build 250 Salt 23 Total 2007 Procedures In a large bowl, mix the water and the flours to a shaggy mass. Cover the bowl and let rest (autolyse) for 1-2 hours. Sprinkle the salt over the dough and add the starter in chunks. Mix the dough to incorporate the added salt and starter uniformly. Transfer to a clean, lightly-oiled bowl and cover. Ferment until expanded by 75% with stretch and folds at 30, 60 and 110 minutes. (I do the first two S&F's in the bowl and the third on a lightly floured board.) Divide the dough as desired and place in floured bannetons or on a couche. Cover. Proof at room temperature for 1-3 hours, then refrigerate for 8-40 hours (or more?). If you think the loaves need it, proof at room temperature for additional time before baking. Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in a Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 30 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 20 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 30-40 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. The crust was crunchy in the darker-baked parts and chewy in the rest. The crumb was moderately open and mildly chewy. The flavor was complex, sweet and creamy. There was the slightest hint of acetic acid tang. Interestingly, even though the whole wheat was only 12% of the total flour, the distinctive flavor of Turkey Red wheat came through. I baked the second loaf 40 hours after retarding it, including the last hour at room temperature, while the oven preheated. It turned out ... well ... it was kind of spectacular, in my humble opinion. The crust is crunchier. The crumb has the same chewing consistency - what I call tender/chewy - but it is substantially more open, and the flavor is substantially more sour. Interestingly enough, I think creamy, lactic acid flavors still predominate, but there is more of an acetic acid tang. Now, that is all based on a first taste when the loaf was just completely cooled. If the flavor profile evolves, I'll add a note. As far as I can recall, I have only retarded dough for more than 24 hours once before. That was an experiment with my San Joaquin Sourdough, and the retardation was of the dough before dividing. Today's loaf is so good, that I believe I'm going to stick with this routine for a while. It sure made delicious bread. Happy baking! David
Hi David, I decided to try this bread as per the recipe you posted as per Ann Rogers. I halved the recipe to make one boule. And I stuck to all purpose for this bread. I made a stiff starter (probably around 62%) - which I think fermented a bit too long in my oven with the light on - about 12 hours, however, I went for it. It went into the fridge for about 12 hours, baked at 475 F in my Staub DO lid on for 20 minutes, then lid off, dropped the temp to 450F with convection on for 12 minutes. I'll send a crumb shot when it cools. Here is a 2nd shot of the bread, cooling....
I made this seeded multigrain a few days back.  I consider it a success but I would make changes next time.   It was light and soft (short from the oil) but not at all sour, and I'm not sure the tiny hard seeds are even digestible. Next time I might sprout and/or grind the seeds first, and use less oil (it was too shortened). Preferment: Let it ferment for 12 hours at room temp (averaged 19C). Seeds: Soaked the seeds, let them absorb and "gel up". Dough: I did several stretch and folds and bulk fermented at 8C for 8 hours, then divided and shaped and proofed at room temp for 2 hours.  It could have gone longer.
I think I have finally achieved what I wanted to do for about the three years that I have been sourdoughing. I think I have achieved the oven spring I wanted, and by all means yall be the judge. I took the very same recipe that I had for my third attempt with two notable differences. So here it is... and for what it was made for... Ye Gods I love sandwiches!
It has just become clear to me that extraction rates of flour are not always comparable. When someone says that straight flour (white flour, AP flour, whatever) is about 72% extraction, that means 72% of the whole grain was kept as flour.  28% was tossed out as animal feed, including the bran, germ, and some wasted endosperm. On the other hand, when talking about patent flour and clear flour, the percentages are not of the whole grain, but of the straight flour.  So patent flour of 85% extraction is 85% of the straight flour (which was 72% of the grain).  So that's actually only 61% of the whole grain. This link describes it in more detail: http://www.theartisan.net/flour_descriptions_and_definitions.htm Here is another page about it: https://bakerpedia.com/ingredients/straight-grade-flour/ Here it is visually: Here are several links that use %-of-whole-grain when talking about extraction:
No story! Just needed to use up some of my stash! 😊 Recipe Makes 3 loaves Seed Soaker 50 g Sesame seeds (I used half black and half white) 30 g Amaranth seeds 30 g Millet seeds 70 Sunflower seeds 30 g Buckwheat groats 175 g room temperature water 30 g plain yogurt Main dough 600 g strong baker’s unbleached flour 150 g high extraction Selkirk flour (175 g berries) 150 g high extraction Red Fife flour (175 g berries) 100 g high extraction Rye flour (115 g berries) 50 g freshly ground flax seeds 600 g water + 50 g 22 g Pink Himalayan salt 250 g levain (Procedure in recipe) Extra bran or wholewheat flour for levain builds Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day
Our Sourdough Bread Baking Project was a resounding success!! A little background ... I received a donation from the KAF "Bake for Good" kids program.  But I put a little twist on it.  I had my advanced biology students create their own sourdough starter as part of our cell respiration unit.  The plan was to get the starters going and then bake bread with it.  But as a new sourdough baker myself, I came on this forum to ask for help on just about everything! The biggest challenge was that I was only with the students for about an hour each day and they would only be have access to their bread every 24 hours.  But, we worked it out! I am so thankful for everyone's tips and advice!  Here's the link to that original thread: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/59346/students-baking-sourdough-please-help-teacher-out The students had SO MUCH FUN with this project. As you can see from the first picture, they named their starters and one group named theirs "Kanye Yeast". When he saw how nice his loaf of bread came out, he exclaimed, "I AM SO PROUD OF KANYE!"  Hahahaha! They were not the prettiest loaves of bread you've ever seen, nor did they have the best crumb. But they tasted darn good and they were just beaming with pride. After they were baked, we had a "Bread Party" ... We had 2 toasters going and several slicing stations.  Students brought in all sorts of toppings and we shared it with other teachers in our school.  Everyone was so impressed!  Here are some photos of our journey! (I forgot to take photos of some stuff like shaping the loaves).
I tried Mike Giraudo's recipe, posted by dmsnyder.  It was as follows Makes two 875g loafs Mix all ingredients 2 minutes on low speed until mixed, then mix 9 more minutes on next level speed. Then a quick stretch and fold, rest dough 30 mins, then stretch and fold one more time. Then cover and let dough rest for about 8 hours at room temp. After 8 hours, divide and shape into loafs and then into bannetons or lightly oiled containers, cover- then into the refrigerator for at least 12 - 32 hours. (The longer the time, the more sour the bread) After refrigeration, place immediately into a pre-heated Dutch oven @475 for 20 mins and then uncover and cook for another 10 mins @450 (or until you like the color of your bread.) Feel free to use all purpose flour, makes for a great crumb. I don't have a stand mixer, so I kneaded by hand, not quite to a window pane (knowing what was coming next).  Other than that, I followed this recipe to the letter.  Here are some of the details: Here is the crumb: Nice crumb for 60% dough. I've let it cool 8 hours, and just tried some. The crust is chewy and very nice. The bread has a mild sour tang.  Pleasant, and enough to make me go back for more.  Too mild presently, but I'm sure it will be more sour by tomorrow. Unfortunately (and I'm being snobbish here), the sour tang isn't quite like San Francisco sourdough.  It's very close though.  A bit too much in the middle of the tongue and top of the mouth, rather than pulling at the back corners of my mouth. But this is getting very close.
San Francisco Sourdough has always been a sort of holy grail for me, based entirely on its reputation. I have only previously tasted my own few attempts to bake it, drawn from the many SFSD recipes available online and in books and I have judged the results  to have varied between "OK" and "not too bad", so I was delighted to see David Snyder's blog entry on 7th March 2019 and his SFSD formula which is fairly closely derived from that of the original bakers. I had to try it. I followed David's adaptation with just a couple of tweaks. I doubled the volume to make two loaves and  reduced the percentage of whole wheat flour from 25% to 20%. I was also concerned that the  60% hydration was rather too low for a formula which included whole wheat so I upped it to 65%. In fact when I came to mix the final dough it felt far too dry so I added another 50g of water which raised the hydration to 69%. I usually then develop the dough by hand but on this occasion I decided to save a little time by using my KA mixer, which with 2kg+ of dough turned out to be a bad idea. The dough immediately climbed up the dough hook and started to entomb the whole mixer. 15 minutes later after I had scraped the dough back down into the bowl I carried on with a series of s & f's and then with half hourly s & f's for three hours before leaving it in peace at room temperature for a further five hours.  Dividing and shaping was followed by one further hour at room temperature followed by about 14 hours in the fridge. The loaves were removed from the fridge and left uncovered at room temperature for an hour while the oven heated. This was just to dry out the surface after an overnight proof with a shower cap on. And the crumb. Strangely although the two loaves were baked at the same time in the same oven, the one below has a more opem crumb! Well although I have never tasted San Francisco Sourdough this comes as close to my expectations as I could have hoped. It has a delicious complex flavour and an impressive sour tang. Better still toasted. So . Thank you David for introducing me to this formula. I see that your next bake will be based on your conversation with Ramon Padilla and I look forward to that. Alan
Dear Bakers, Hello from Toronto. I am new to this Forum, so I hope I am not inventing a bicycle here. But even so, it's really fun. And it's a great and useful site. I want to share my "recipe" of sourdough sweet (challah-type) buns. They do not look/taste much like sourdough, but they in fact are. Very soft, delicate crust and great taste/flavour. Some history: I started practicing baking regularly 4 years ago. It took 2 years to master 1 recipe,  Everyday Vermont Sourdough by Jeffrey Hamelman - tailored to my family needs, as the author suggests. In our case it is substituting rye (one member of family is intolerant) and whole wheat (we just don't like it) by all purpose flour. My family is really small, so I bake one pound loaf a time (half of the original recipe), 3 times a week. In 2 years and with flour substitutions (and it's Canadian unbleached flour, no matter what you do with it - it puffs) I ended up with the following proportions: Levain: 2.6 ounce flour/3 ounce water/0.5 ounce started (moderately liquid)Dough: All levain minus starter put aside for next bake, 8 ounce water/14 ounce four (1:1 Robin Hood Best for Bread and Walmart Organic All Purpose Unbleached), 0.3 salt. Sometimes I use soaked flax-seed and/or sunflower seeds, no more than half an ounce per loaf. I give it really long time to proof, sometimes up to 4-5 hours, due to schedule. That is why I make the dough a bit on the 'drier' side, to avoid over-proofing. Once my family became comfortable with the Everyday Vermont Sourdough, both eating and baking, I was looking for a sourdough recipe for sweet buns. I tried to use the sourdough Chalhah recipes, including the one from this site, nothing worked. In fact I found that no online recipes work for me, that is why I am very grateful to Mr. Hamelman for his book, which helped me to achieve good results. So, nothing worked for sweet Challah or buns. Then I went back to Everyday Vermont Sourdough and simply substituted the water in my 'tailored' dough mix with sugar and eggs. Dough fermenting time and proofing time increased a lot, baking temperature and time decreased. Proportions:Levain: 2.6 ounce flour/3 ounce water/0.5 ounce started (moderately liquid)Dough: levain/13 ounces of flour (mostly all purpose organic)/8.5 ounces of "liquid"/0.3 ounce salt. Sometimes adding 'craisins'. 8.5 ounces "Liquid" include: 2.5 ounce of sugar, 2 large eggs - weighted, plus water to add up to 8.5 ounces, which is often less than 2 ounces of water. Sometimes I beat the eggs in stand mixer for about 5 min with sugar. Sometimes everyone is asleep at home, so I just give the eggs and sugar a vigorous mix with a hand beater... - this does not affect results in any way. The process - I follow Mr. Hamelman's "Vermont Sourdough" - but increase time for dough and proofing (sometimes just proof overnight on the counter). Dough pieces are about 180 grams each (1 pound of dough yields 4 buns), I usually double my recipe and get 8 buns, freeze 4) This is how they look shaped And this is after 5-7 hours of proofing - I don't really know if it's doubled or almost doubled in size. I just start pre-heating oven once the buns touch each other. Preheat oven to maximum (525 for about 30 min), brush buns with egg white, score and put into oven. Turn the heat down to 400 degrees, bake 10 min, then check (rotate in the oven if needed), bake another 5-10 min. If needed, bake 5 more minutes at 300 degrees, or just leave for 10 min in the off oven. You can eat them as soon as they are completely cooled. We have them with butter and/or cheese and/or jam. The buns freeze and unfreeze very well and remain soft. Output weight between 150 and 160 grams, so they are NOT small. I tried to make 5 buns from a pound, and they didn't come out well - too 'stretchy', not as delicate proportion crumb/crust. So went back to bigger size. I hope some of you may enjoy this simple recipe, or rather recipe substitution idea, for a breakfast or snack. Again, many thanks to Mr. Hamelman for his excellent book.
20190324 re-bake Off it goes to and Misshaped, so I have to re-bake My first rye bread using home-milled, whole-grain rye flour Close-up Then you make the thermophilic sourdough The "scoring" was not supposed to be there.
A friend asked for some help with a recipe for a Portuguese corn bread known as broa, and the formula she had been given was not working for her and was producing hockey pucks.  So, having not made any corn bread for a long time I decided to try and figure out what it should be. It turned out to be one of those on-line formulas that was probably never tested as written and was destined to produce pretty good hockey pucks if you followed it.  But it did give some history and I found some photos that were helpful but nothing that seemed to be really authoritative. The recipe called for about equal weights of corn flour and AP flour but called for almost all of the water to be used to hydrate the corn and almost none allocated to the wheat flour component so there was never going to be any significant gluten development and thus it was going to become a hockey puck.  And there was no fat in it so it was going to quickly become a stale hockey puck. But after a couple of iterations I got it to work pretty well.  The first issue was what to use for flour.  That was solved by using instant masa for the corn which is quite fine and does not leave you with a sandy/granular mouth feel, though if you don't add a fair amount of water and fat it will still be a hockey puck, and I went to a strong bread flour in place of AP so that I would have the potential capacity to carry the large load of corn without getting the hockey puck effect. The second issue was process.  How to develop the gluten before incorporating the masa?  I was not sure it would be possible because of the large fraction of corn flour that was called for.  The solution was to use enough boiling water to saturate the masa and to include all of the salt with the masa.  This made the saltiness of the final bread just fine without inhibiting the yeast very much (since the corn does not get mixed in until the yeast is well established). The bread flour then gets some sugar, the IDY, and enough very warm water to yield a 100°F dough after it begins to mix.  I let it sit for 15 min to autolyse then mixed it at high speed long enough to develop the gluten but not to the point where it would not accept the hydrated masa, incorporating 6% solid fat in the process.  The fat would further stabilize the gluten and should improve crumb texture, mouth feel, and staling qualities of the bread. Now the corn was added and mixed until it was fully incorporated.  The dough got sticky enough to stay on the side of the mixing bowl, but was easy to scrape off with a silicone scraper.  And it had a good degree of extensibility so I thought it would tolerate a short bulk fermentation to get some gas into the dough. A 30 min BF followed by very gentle shaping into a boule and about 40 min of final proof (about 50% volume increase) was as much as I thought it could take.  So into the combi oven it went:  500°F for 15 min at high fan speed, followed by 15 min at low fan speed while it cooled down to 350°F.  At this point the core temperature was 205°F and I pulled it out to cool. I think that if you bake it in a conventional oven it will certainly take longer but getting it to brown first is important since the corn does not help much with crust color. After 2 hrs to cool, it was time to test.  Contrary to the first round, this loaf sliced easily and the crumb texture is much more like a conventional loaf of wheat bread than a loaf of corn bread, even though by weight of ingredients there is about 50% corn masa in the mix. The flavor of the corn is totally dominant though you may want to personalize it by adjusting the amount of sugar. Photos below of the crust and the crumb illustrate the reality of iteration two.
In honor of the holiday of Purim, I tried making triangular rolls with a "filling" in the middle -- halved cherry tomatoes and cracked olives. I cut the dough (Pain à l'Ancienne) roughly into triangles, and then did my best to stretch/massage them to a nice shape. They aren't very clean or uniform at all, but I'm generally pretty happy with them. It definitely feels like they are in the spirit of the day! Instead of hamantaschen, I call them hamanbroten :)I enjoyed reading through this thread about triangle bread before baking. For my second and final bake of the day (San Joaquin), I'm thinking of trying Mini's triangle-pin wheel pattern on boules.
Things are going monstrous on the bread front. I have recently gotten into yeast breads (not as much an art as a science, and you better hurry!) and even explored the fun-handling of rye flour and making rye breads. Being an old New Jersey native, I like a good lip smacking jaw-dropping sour rye and I think I found one here jewish-rye-bread-recipe at King Arthur Flour The only thing I did differently was run the oven a little hotter (in the 450 range), cook it for 14 instead of 10 minutes initially and bulk fermented for 2 hours instead of 1. I noticed my instant yeast takes longer with rye flours than usual. I also did a three tier build of the NMNF and ran it hot, at 93 degrees. DAB was right about that, the sour near cut the mason jar! But with yeast breads I found a certain urgency, a quickness of pace that I don't like as much as sourdoughs. I think Ill stick this one for a while. It is a serious lip-smacking/ vinegar tasting bread, just the way I like it. Additional pictures of recent breads, come to think of it, all my breads, are here... Google Album: Sour Notes
Sourdough Bread: March 22, 2019 David Snyder This bake is a kind of hybrid (high bread?). It utilizes elements of the formula and method shared by Mike Giraudo on Facebook, Peter Reinhart's James Beard Award-winning “San Francisco Sourdough,” as presented in his book, “Crust and Crumb” and various techniques I have adopted over the years, such as autolyse. The fermentations in a warm environment should enhance yeast and lactobacillus growth and production of lactic acid. The cold retardations and low hydration of the starter and the final dough should enhance acetic acid production. I am hoping the final result will be a moderately sour bread with a pleasing balance of flavors. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 152 13 AP flour 771 66 Whole Wheat flour 116 10 Whole Rye flour 131 11 Water 769 65 Salt 23 2 Total 1962 167 Starter Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 110 88 Whole Rye flour 15 12 Water 62.5 50 Firm starter 62.5 50 Total 250 200 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Ferment at 76ºF for 8-10 hours. Refrigerate for 12 hours or up to 3 days. Note: Prior to mixing this starter, I fed a firm starter with high-protein flour at 50% hydration every other day for a week. These builds were fermented at room temperature until ripe, then refrigerated until the next feeding. Substituting 10-25% of the white flour with whole grain wheat, rye or a mix will speed fermentation and is generally felt to make the starter “healthier.” Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 771 WW flour 116 Whole Rye flour 116 Water 686 Salt 23 Starter 250 Total 1962 Procedures Place the flours and water in the bowl of a stand mixer and mix at low speed to a shaggy mass. Cover the bowl and let it rest (autolyse) for 1-2 hours. Sprinkle the salt over the surface of the dough. Add the starter in chunks. Mix at Speed 1 for 2 minutes to distribute ingredients then for about 9 minutes at Speed 2 to develop the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Shape into a ball. Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment at 80ºF for about 3 hours with stretch and folds at 50 and 100 minutes. Divide the dough into two equal pieces. Cover and let rest for 10-30 minutes to relax the gluten. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Cover or place in food-grade plastic bags. Proof for 2-3 hours at 80ºF until the loaves have expanded by about 50%. Refrigerate for 12-40 hours (The longer the cold retardation, the more sour the final loaf). Remove from refrigerator. Check on degree of proofing. Proof further at 80ºF, as needed. (May need 1-3 hours.) If adequately proofed, proceed to scoring and baking. Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 20 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 10 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 20-35 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. I think I finally nailed it. The crust is super crunchy. The crumb is tender but chewy. The flavor has a decidedly sour flavor with lactic acid tones dominating. Except for the flavors attributable to the rye and whole wheat, I could convince myself this was a Parisian Bakery sourdough bread. Happy baking! David
Since the facility to accept text from Word documents is not yet implemented here, the text of this post can be found at this link.  The figure below is notional but while it does not reflect lab measurements, it should be thought of as an aid to thinking about the underlying issues.
This week I was inspired by some of the cool recipes on this site that mix cooked potatoes into the dough, so I thought I'd try it. I made rolls and bagel squares, inspired by PalwithnoovenP's recipe on this site. My bagel squares turned out quite misshapen and ugly, but taste great. I am not sure why I can't get the surface smooth. Rather than pan-frying them like in the recipe, I baked them. I also omitted the onions, so effectively its a 50:50 potato and flour bagel dough. My rolls turned out prettier, it's a 50:50 mix of WW flour and cooked potatoes. I used yeast rather than my SD starter. Crumb: Happy baking!
While searching for ideas on what to include in my next batch of 12 loaves, I came across this: http://www.25bestbakers.com/recipes.html?ID=12. I had all the ingredients on hand so with a few minor tweaks in ingredients from the recipe and using my usual procedure, here it is: Recipe Makes 3 loaves of ~870 g raw weight each Sprouts 75 g quinoa (I used half red, half white quinoa) 75 g kamut berries Water, enough to soak Dough 900 g strong bakers unbleached flour 115 g high extraction Spelt flour (135 g Spelt berries) 125 g high extraction kamut flour (145 g Kamut berries) 860 g water 50 g freshly ground flax seeds 30 g yogurt 26 g Pink Himalayan salt, 26g 145 g sprouted quinoa, coarsely ground 115 g sprouted kamut, coarsely ground 250 g 100% hydration levain (procedure in recipe) Extra bran and flour for feeding the levain 3 days before: Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day These used a bit more flour than my usual base of ~1100 grams so I got slightly bigger boules. I was a bit worried that they wouldn’t fit in my pots, but the loaves had plenty of room to spring nicely. I am very pleased with these. Hopefully the crumb is as nice as the outside.
I baked this one several weeks ago but have not had a chance to post.  This is a 70% Whole Wheat bread made with freshly ground whole wheat with no sifting.  I watched a video on how to adjust the stones in my MockMill II and ended up with a super-fine flour, no sifting necessary.  I think for the next bake I will sift courser and still sift once and then re-grind at the fine level. This one turned out a little denser than I would have liked, but it had a nice tang to it and made great toast. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the beer for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, sour cream, olive oil and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put the bread in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack for at least 2 hours before eating.
That's the saying.  But I was already home and wanted to go big anyway. My wife was off to an early morning flight to Tobago for a Pan-Am Dragon Boating competition.  She asked if I'd bake a WW fig-raisin-pecan levain bread as some boarding gate breakfast for the troops traveling together.  Made two, sliced 'em, and packed them off with some butter and cream cheese.  These are designed to bake dark and craggy, the left with traditional baguette scoring, the right with a criss-cross design. 630g x 2 Getting itchy to bake up something.  This gargantuan specimen is a Rye with Caraway.  Instead of using a Rye Sour I opted for my 125% rye levain. 1000g x 1 A short time ago I decided to Ziggy-up a 5-Grain Levain. I can't recall, but he's probably about 750g.
I baked a : 100g Spelt 100g Caputo Durum Rimacinata 300g Stong Canadian White 420g water 72g starter - 80% hydration - from the night before 10g salt I had a shorter AL this time 2 hours as I wanted to use the stiffer starter from the night before. I found that because I used the spelt and durum that I almost got a windowpane just within that shorter AL time. Otherwise my usual process of adding leaven, wait 30 min and then add salt and a bit more water. Slap and fold and then bulk for approx. 6 hours including a lamination and 2 folds. 30 min benchrest and 30 min at room temp in banneton before in wine cooler at 4C. for 15 hours. I then scored 1 loaf with a simple in the middle cut and the other with a double.. I noticed a slightly lesser rise on the double cut loaf and thought it was amazing to see where the bubbles were trying to escape...I always knew that scoring can affect the crumb and the shape of a loaf and was great to being able to compare...I might try that again.. Kat Crumb of double score loaf
I  was commenting to another Australian baker Dell about soft wheat grains and flours and was mentioning the Caputo Manitoba Ora type O that i have recently found for sale in Western Australia in 5 kg bags and have been  using. My wife was extolling the virtues of a Current Walnut and Fennel loaf that she had recently purchased and enjoyed, so i decided i would make a similar loaf using the Italian flour Australian Sultanas and Fennel seeds in a conventional dough and here it is i baked it in a recently acquired Sassafras clay baker.
Speaking of ensaymadas, here are some that I made for my co-teachers. I woke up at 4:00 AM to deliver them as fresh as possible to my co-workers without having to come late to work. They loved every bit of it, saying how artisanal they look and taste and its their first time tasting something like that.
In order to learn how to write WebAssembly (wasm) code in the rust language (eyes glaze over... yeah, it wasn't an important detail) I've built a simple sourdough calculator: https://mikedilger.com/bread.html There is plenty of scope for improvement.
I loved this bread so much that I decided to follow David's version, but substituted the whole wheat with white Kamut. I let it bulk ferment for 9 hours, put it in the fridge for 15 1/2 hours. All in all it came out even better than I expected! It has a lovely golden color from the Kamut and a nice bit of tang. The crust is wonderful. I love the flavor of Kamut and this recipe. Thanks David!
So, i've been baking sourdough bread for about a year now. I love using a blend of various whole grain flours, in this picture, I've done a blend of whole wheat, sorghum and AP with a Rye Starter! I usually get decent crumbs when I add a little commercial yeast into my dough to help it rise, however, I don't get a strong crumb (or at least i think so) without adding a little commercial yeast. I live in India and the sourdough bread scene is still upcoming but slowly. Was hoping for a few tips! I'm not sure why i'm unable to get the bigger 'holes' in my bread.
I recently bought a 25 lb bag of whole spelt berries, and just milled the first of it. For this bread, I used 30% whole spelt, the remainder being Wheat Montana all-purpose. The hydration is somewhere between 75 and 80%. I had to leave the house during the initial rise / folds, so I ended up letting it go for longer than usual before putting it in the fridge to retard overnight. This made the bread slightly more sour than my usual loaves, but it is still quite pleasant.I find that the spelt is very mild tasting, and it was difficult to even detect that the bread was 30% whole grain! I'm thinking of upping it to 50% whole spelt for the next loaf, or maybe 40% whole spelt, 10% whole rye, or something like that. And a pic with the crumb:
I want to design my own bread lame to solve my issues I have with the current lames on the market.. Anyone have any suggestions on improvements to the current available lames on the market?? My current issue is the handle being so short, so I feel like it's child size haha. I'd like a longer more sturdy handle. Any feedback would be greatly appreciated. Thank you
It was Friday again and again time for my 4 loaves for friends... I saw a Semolina Sesame loaf in Tartine 1 and another sesame seed loaf in Tartine 3. Then I had a look in the larder and also had some Khorasan/Kamut left and had a golden vision formed  in my head with all those seeds too..... 25% Caputo Semola Rimacinata 25% Doves Farm Kamut/Khorasan 50% Strong Canadian Flour 80% water, 2% salt, 15% roasted sesame seeds and more seeds for outside.. 20% starter feed 1:1:1 in the morning and used after 3 hours at peak 3 hours Autolyse flour and water (50g kept behind) - aim for 28C target dough temperature Mix in levain - Rubaud and wait 30 min Add salt and leftover water and slap and folds (using also petrissage manuel where I layer dough and then slap and fold as I had 4.1Kg of dough), I aim to have a windowpane at the end of mixing Coil folds after 30 min After 30 min - mix roasted seeds and fold and squeeze in , coil folds after 60 coil folds after 60 min coil Left dough alone for last 1 hour and dough doubled Pre-shape, 30 min bench rest, and final fold via cinching and room temp proofing in bannetons for 30 min before going into 4C wine cooler for 14 hours. Pre-shape and probably could have done with a little bit of less tension as the dough was strong anyway.. I also need a better set of scales.... lovely dough dump and degree of rise during bulk.... I held a small test loaf back.... It had a  lovely sandwich crumb but the best was just the taste  with all those sesame seeds! I probably next time add a bit more water as the seeds also seemed to have absorbed a lot of the water as well as the Kamut and the Strong Canadian flour too. I also probably would squeeze the seeds a bit more to avoid potential little lumps that I spotted during bulk and kept squeezing out... But overall very, very happy with this bake!
I am so happy that people have posted that they had problems with Tartine. This is my third time making the country bread and it just doesn't feel right, literally. Here is what I got, or better, don't get... Luckily it comes out pretty good, no oven burst like I discovered with the 1-2-3 loaf but not bad. And good holes inside, but again, too much work for big holes. I don't like big holes, the spreading butter falls right through them. It is really a shame that my wife says that this is her favorite kind of bread. We had a wonderful breakfast of nothing but bread, which made us all quite late. I admit, with a rye NMNF starter, the rye seems to really come through. So I got three different kinds of flour in this loaf. Anyone else got problems with the infamous/ famous tartine? Next time no autolyse AND throwing the flour all over the place!
When I put in my order of grains from Daybreak Mills, I included a bag of Buckwheat. Tartine 3 has a recipe for Toasted Buckwheat Groats with Crème fraîche so I took my inspiration from there. Having a litre of local yogurt in the fridge, I subbed it out for the crème fraîche, used durum wheat and some Buckwheat flour instead of what he called for, and also cut back on hydration.  The formula was also adjusted for 3 loaves. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Add-ins 150 g Buckwheat Groats, toasted Warm water to soak 50 g Yogurt Dough 600 g strong bakers unbleached flour 400 g high extraction durum flour (500 g durum berries, milled and sifted) 100 g buckwheat flour (100 g buckwheat groats, milled) 50 g freshly ground flax 800 g water 25 g pink Himalayan salt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) Extra bran and AP flour to feed the Levain. Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day The oven spring could have been a tad better especially when I increased the amount of flour compared to my usual base amount. I guess all that water that the groats absorbed had a bit of a negative effect. Next time, I need to add just enough water to cover the Groats and not add extra when it gets absorbed. One thing I am noticing since we have been getting warmer weather (barely above 0C (32F) but better than -20C!), is that my dough seems to be moving a lot faster than in the depths of winter even though it is the same temperature in the house. I even bulked this one in the counter to try to slow it down. Anyone else notice that the seasons affect bulk and proofing even though it’s the same room temperature?
I've commented on this in the past, but it's remarkable how much neglect a starter can go through and still be able to rise well after a few feeds. I fed my starter Friday morning, then Friday night and again Saturday morning. Admittedly I used my proofer box after the Saturday morning feed. It hadn't been fed in a few weeks. I used all the starter from the previous feeds to build up volume and had no discard. My first feed was 1:3:3 and went 12 hours, my second was the same and went for about 14 hours, my third was 1:2:3 and went for about 6 hours to a triple in volume. I ended up with about 330 grams of starter. While not what I intended, I ended up making a play on Forkish's FWSY Pain De Campage recipe as it calls for a high starter volume and I wanted to use up what I had made. My plans changed as I had been planing on creating a home brew American Ale beer yesterday AND make some bread and then reality set in. I was chewing off more than I could get done before dinner plans. I had no whole wheat flour in the house which compounded this. I ended up using only bread flour and to make it a bit more interesting found some left over oat bran in the pantry. For the two loaves I added 10 ounces (from a measuring cup - I should have weighted it I know) and 10 ounces (by weight) of very hot water to create a soaker while I did autolyse. I decided on 10 ounces of bran as that's all I had left in the bag. It was clumpy when wet so I it really required a lot of effort to break it down and incorporate into the dough. I did three or four folds, used a proofer at 77 degrees and by the time I was home after dinner the dough had more than doubled. The recipe called for 2 grams of dry yeast which I added to help the rise given the bran. I baked this morning - so about 12 hours later - and clearly the dough was pushing the envelope of fermentation time. I baked in a combo cooker and achieved only a very slight rise. But this has to be the softest crumb I've ever baked. It's moist, lovely and flavourful. Every time I use anything bran in a recipe I'm more of a fan of it's impact on the crumb! I coated it in dark flax seeds.
Sourdough Bread: March 30, 2019 David Snyder This is another hybrid bread. It differs from my last bake in the following ways: I have increased the whole grain flour to a total of 30% of the total flour by adding 10% Kamut. I have increased the final dough hydration to 75%. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 147 13 AP flour 668 57 Whole Wheat flour 116 10 Whole Rye flour 116 10 Whole Kamut flour 116 10 Water 872 75 Salt 23 2 Total 2058 177 Starter Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 110 88 Whole Rye flour 15 12 Water 62.5 50 Firm starter 62.5 50 Total 250 200 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Ferment at 76ºF for 8-10 hours. Refrigerate for 12 hours or up to 3 days. Note: I have maintained my 50% hydration starter with feedings as previously described – a bit of rye and the remainder high-protein flour – with feedings about 3 times per week. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 668 WW flour 116 Whole Rye flour 96 Whole Kamut flour 116 Water 789 Salt 23 Starter 250 Total 2058 Procedures Place the flours and water in the bowl of a stand mixer and mix at low speed to a shaggy mass. Cover the bowl and let it rest (autolyse) for 1-2 hours. Sprinkle the salt over the surface of the dough. Add the starter in chunks. Mix at Speed 1 for 2 minutes to distribute ingredients then for about 9 minutes at Speed 2 to develop the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Shape into a ball. Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment at 80ºF for about 3 hours with stretch and folds at 50 and 100 minutes. Divide the dough into two equal pieces. Cover and let rest for 10-30 minutes to relax the gluten. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Cover or place in food-grade plastic bags. Proof for 2-3 hours at 80ºF until the loaves have expanded by about 50%. Refrigerate for 12-40 hours (The longer the cold retardation, the more sour the final loaf). Remove from refrigerator. Check on degree of proofing. Proof further at 80ºF, as needed. (May need 1-3 hours.) If adequately proofed, proceed to scoring and baking. Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 20 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 10 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 20-35 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. Tasting notes: It was severely yummy. I divided the dough from this mix into 3 loaves. I baked two after 24 hours cold retardation. One went to a neighbor. The third loaf was baked after 40 hours cold retardation. It has a more open crumb than the one pictured above, and the flavor is significantly more sour. Happy baking! David
I decided a few days ago to bake dmsnyder's SF Sourdough loaf take 4, which was marked "the best version" on his list of recipes. I followed his recipe exactly.  Except that I had to make a few changes.  And I made a few more changes because they just made sense to me. Firstly, I mixed by hand.  I don't have a machine. Second, instead of whole wheat flour, I substituted whole rye flour.  This, I think, at least doubled the sourness factor. I've heard a lot of good things about pineapple juice when used for starting a starter. So instead of water I substituted pineapple juice for all of the water in the levain.  If it's good for starter, why not levain? Levain is a type of starter after all. By this point I was really getting excited about all that sweetness! He retards in the refrigerator overnight.  I retarded in a drinks fridge for however long it took me to visit the downtown bookstore. I've posted a picture of the crumb at the top.  I'm really pleased with the large open spaces between the gluten.  I'm considering using a basting brush to open up those holes a bit larger. The loaves did turn out surprisingly small, especially considering as I baked the 2kg version of the dough.  Although small, they were incredibly fluffy and the crust was crispy and delicious.  Come to think of it, the loaves didn't start out small, but they got smaller and smaller starting about 20 minutes after I took them out of the oven.
This is my attempt as David's lovely formula and I am glad that today a friend who has often been to San Francisco sampled the bread for me and said that indeed it reminds him of San Francisco on a sunny day in the UK! He very gladly took also a loaf home with him too.... I tried to follow David's process a closely as I could and just had to make a number of changes. One that I handmixed the dough and also as there was no target temperature but David mentioned that he put the dough into the proofer at 80F...I actually mixed the dough and aimed for 28C... The starter was also very new to me as a 'firmer' version and when it looked like this I thought it must be ready after nourishing it for a week like described by David. I handmixed after 2 hours AL and also held 16g water back in order to mix the stiffer starter in easier. I then waited for 30min and added the salt. I then completed a number of slap and folds until the dough had nicely developed. I bulked and followed folding as per David's instruction. After 3 hours the dough had risen, to approx. 50% and was nice and bouncy. . 30 min bench rest and then final shaping cinching and another one I tried more the J. Hamelman oblong shaping which ends with a longer batard. I should have weighted them as one was too big for the banneton although a 1kg one and the dough was 1.2kg... This is where I was nervous about David's instruction and to let the dough proof at room temp for 2 hours or more as my wine cooler is not the coldest...so I gave it 1 hour and the dough had grown although not the 50% as indicated by David. I baked after 15 hours in 4C wine cooler... The crumb is nice and lacy and great sandwich bread. The taste is indeed more sour than my usual bread. Not shockingly more sour but different.....I never had SF sourdough so I cannot comment myself but I liked the taste! If I were to bake again, I probably would judge the size of banneton more carefully so that I  let the proof go on a bit longer before going into the wine cooler. Thank you David......
I saw this beautiful image of a Pain Fendu from a very inspired baker http://picdeer.com/media/2004093069051294434_3455206222 and this was the over ambitious and a bit impromptu attempt to recreate something similar. I basically mixed a  80% Champlain and rolled it out in the middle, degassing the dough quite a bit and then with the split at the bottom put it into a banneton. Sadly both versions stuck together again (although the 'split' was floured with rye flour) and did not quite open the way I was hoping for...one looking more like a ciabatta and the other just ripped partly open... BUT what I could not believe was how little the crumb was affected by the severe degassing of the dough? In fact, it seems that the degassing contributed to even a nicer distribution of the bubbles, I wonder? If anyone has any good ideas for shaping a Pain Fendu, then please let me know. I did a search here any other tips are happily received... Kat
So, a friend was coming back from Europe, and we invited her over for an April Fool “Holy Bread” Luncheon. We served Holey bagels (strong bread flour), Kosher Challah (weak bread flour), and Pain de Campania decorated with a cross.
Right, so I've just gotten out of my baby stages of baking.  I personally had several questions throughout my learning process.  You probably have some too if you're looking at this forum.  I thought it would be helpful for newer bakers to get some quick answers from a person who has had to ask the same questions they may have.  This is a simple, no frills post.  This is for United States, and it does not attempt to retread old ground that has likely been covered before with other guides.  I'm not going to tell you what scale to get, or what book will best help you on your bread-making journey (to whatever destination that may be).  Like I said, I am no expert.  Hopefully, that's why this guide will be helpful. 1. How hard is baking? Making decent bread is not rocket science.  But just because humans have been making bread since the dawn of writing doesn't make it easy.  Making good bread is an art that will take experience. Books will help you get the basis to perform the techniques correctly and how to identify mistakes...to a degree.  But you really can only learn baking by doing it.  My suggestion is to read a bit until you feel comfortable trying a recipe or two (NOT hard ones.  You are not going to make perfect croissants on your first day as a baker.)  In the past, baking was primarily done by "feel" and this is still by far the most cost-effective way of doing so for the home baker. You need to understand that we have been baking bread since at least the beginning of written civilization.  Without science.  A biochemistry degree will not make you bake bread better (although it might heighten your entertainment concerning sourdough starters.  Some people seem pretty attached to them...I haven't tried it yet.  Yet.) 2. How time-consuming is this hobby? As much or as little as you like.  There are "five minute" bread recipes (and books) that basically allow you (with a little practice) to make bread with five minutes of work (...and about 2 hours of rising, 40-90 minutes of proofing, and 35 minutes in the oven not including a prebake time.  These don't require your attention except to start each stage.) Most of baking times in recipes consist of waiting for dough to rise.  However, batch fermenting, proofing, and shaping can all take varying amounts of time depending on the composition of the particular recipe.  I've heard of bread recipes that take three or more days to execute.  Since nobody is paying me money to do it, I'm not making those right now. Also, you will improve and get more efficient with time.  If you fail at making a loaf, the only person that will notice is likely you.  Even if the results are not edible, the ingredients and recipe will still be there the next day.  Do not get discouraged.  You will absolutely learn more from your failures than your successes.  Stopping because it's "too hard" is the one major mistake you can make! 3. How money-consuming is this hobby? Not at all.  It is, per pound, cheaper to make bread than actually buy it .  Anecdotally, a loaf of bread costs around $3.79 in my neck of the woods.  5 pounds of good unbleached flour (which can probably make roughly 7 pounds total of dough) is $3.69. I can promise you that the bread you buy from the store does not weigh five pounds.  It will also taste like cardboard after you have tried your own successful bread. 4. I've seen some baking books with a lot of science.  Do I need to know about baking science, and why? There is science that supports what you are doing, and it has been studied extensively by commercial bakeries and professionals.  That may be you some day, but there's a long way to that point.  In the meantime, the science you need to know consists of this: how to read your recipe, and how to "read" your bread.  Know temperature, weights, elevation, humidity.  Rely on the recipe and this site for anything else until you get your "bread" legs. 5. What equipment do I need to start baking? You will need five things.  Everything else should be bought on a project basis ('I need a pastry brush for this project!'): a. A recipe you want to make and the ingredients for it (The recipe is free and the ingredients should be obvious.  See most websites, and this one in particular.) b. Something to heat the bread up in.  For leavened breads, that's (mostly) an oven.  While you don't need a Rolls Royce of ovens, it should be decent.  Oddly, electrical appears to be more recommended than gas due to the venting required in a gas oven (steam is frequently used to help increase the volume and crustiness of a bread).  For leavened breads, it should be able to reach 450 degrees.  An oven thermometer may be required for this, but do not purchase it until you have seen results.  If your oven does not work respectably (always a possibility), you have two basic options.  The cheaper one is to get a cast dutch oven.  Starting out, don't get enameled.  Enameled can absolutely work, but you will have to determine which ones can work and which ones won't (potentially risking health as the coating melts off the walls and evaporates into your bread!) and regular cast iron doesn't require determining whether the thing can withstand 450+ degrees.  It can.  Get a dutch oven without a knob, such as a combo cooker.  Like all things that live in your kitchen, it should be multipurpose and be usable for more than one thing.  Mine is used for baking, but that's its side gig.  Although it was bought for bread-making, my wife has commandeered it for stock, stews, and general cooking.  Your second option for a smaller oven is to get a small portable toaster oven.  I don't know enough about this to answer any questions, sorry.  This website and others, however, will have information. c. A kitchen scale and a kitchen thermometer.  These can be gotten fairly cheaply.  Research your thermometer carefully.  It is your lifeline.  As an aside, you do not require a specialist scale for yeast and salt when starting out.  Stick to the small measuring spoons for a bit.  You'll know when it's needed. d. Mixing bowls, measuring spoons, and a wooden spoon.  I am not a fan of consumer culture, and the dutch whisks just aren't necessary starting out.  You could probably mix with your hands, but a wooden spoon really is a better instrument.  You should be able to find these around your kitchen (and if not, you really should.) e. Something to slash dough with.  The tool of choice is known as a lame (lahm).  In case you haven't figured it out yet, bakers are practical, which in today's society generally translates to "cheap" (both commercial and amateur bakers generally agree on that point.  We like to spend as little money as possible.)  A lame is a safety razor with (sometimes) a handle. It can, understandably, be dangerous.  My personal recommendation is, like all things in your kitchen, the bread slasher should be a multitasker.  In this case, I chose the bread knife as my slashing instrument of choice.  It will slash basic patterns and cut your bread when it's cooled.  Later on, if you feel like you need a bit more precision (or a burning desire for the much-vaunted "ears") you can get a lame.  By getting a lame, I mean go out and  buy a pack of safety razors.  Stop at a chinese joint on the way home and save the chopsticks.  Thread the razor blade through the thin end of one of the chopsticks.  You now have a lame.  Alternatively, you can find professional models.  Above all however, be safe and don't be stupid with sharp objects.  This especially includes razor blades.  You don't want to leave razors (or bits of razors...) in the dough. There's one tool I haven't mentioned, and that's because I'm conflicted on it.  Bench knives.  Really, this tool is actually two versions of the same tool that do different things but share common characteristics.  One type is made of a soft plastic.  It acts like a "hand" in your baking.  It can gently coax high hydration dough out of bowls and containers.  It is gentle and thorough, kind of like a much shorter rubber spatula.  The other version is a metal bench knife that is more common for professionals.  It is used to work with high hydration doughs that will fall apart if not handled correctly as well as use on oven surfaces.  It is also effective for processing large quantities of dough.  Both can divide dough, strip flour from a surface, and shovel dough into other things.  However, neither is required to make bread, which is what stops me from putting it on my list of tools you need.  It gets honorable mention, though.  I have a large, plastic one that I am not in love with, but it works and is useful to me. 6. What book would you recommend for a beginner? The books your local library has and this website.  That's it. Most of the time in your new hobby should be spent with the dough. I doubt this answer will satisfy some readers, however (it wouldn't have satisfied me starting out), so I'll give a more in-depth answer.  You don't know what type of book you knead (hah!) to get yet.  You don't know whether you prefer baking sourdoughs, white wheat peasant loaves, pullman loaves, rye bread, etc.  However, if you've been at it a bit and think you want to keep doing it, you may want to get a good quality general baking book to start with on baking for reference.  That would include not just leavened loaves (which are the main focus of this site) but things like cookies, pies, etc.  Don't get me wrong, I love a good loaf.  But honestly. when you tell people you want to bake, are they going to want: (1) an amazing pain de campagne; or (2) an amazing apple pie?  My money is on *2) in the US.  I can also promise you that your friends will probably not consider you a good baker if you fail the apple pie test, regardless of your skill with pain de campagne. Again, I will recommend trying before you buy a book through your library.  This site has good recommendations for books to look for, so look for them in your local library.  If you want to get into the more theoretical side of baking or just want to see some pretty pictures and/or what's possible, I have a simple and free suggestion.  Use one an e-book trial from a place like Amazon.  I was able to get a 7-day trial of Hamelman's Bread book, and it totally changed my view on baking!  It was some of the best money I have never spent. Above all, pay attention to this site.  It will guide you.  No, it's not a religion.  But it's been around a while, and I have received very helpful responses and learned a ton by reading this site.  I'm a skeptic by nature.  This site is objectively the most helpful tool I have to learn about bread. 7. Any other tips? Youtube.  King arthur flour website.  This website's handbook.  Use a thermometer.  Use a scale.  Be patient with yourself.  Don't spend money if you can avoid it.  Don't worry if the dough is sticky unless it shouldn't be.  Know your humidity and how to adjust for it.  Know your elevation and how to adjust for it. That's it, really.  Good luck!
This loaf is destined for my living longer living stronger  keep fit class tomorrow morning. My wife gave me some rosemarie  sprigs that she broke off whilst re potting her Gallipoli Rosemarie, i was to see if i could get them to strike.I had a fair few leaves from the preparation that i subsequently chopped up and decided to add them to a loaf,  and this is the result. Its a dried yeast loaf with 10% potato 5 % carrot and 1% Chopped Rosemarie. it smells divine  the smaller loaf is for our instructor who will be unable to join us for our after class coffee session  as she has another class of oldies. Fermentation almost complete, and a very important ingredient for the dough maker in the background  Harewood  Estate  Cab Sav  from the Great Southern  of Western Australia, little and large  250g versus 1063g The large loaf was baked in a Sassafras clay baker The smaller one in a small loaf pan i just love the cracks in the crust after cooling
My fellow baker and good friend A.K.A. "Yippee" from The Fresh Loaf site has been gracious enough to mail me several loaves of her awesome bread as well as some other goodies.  It was high time I shared some of my bread with her.  It's taken me longer than it should have, but I needed to figure out how to get the bread to the post office since I leave my house to go into the city every day very early. She had requested one of my breads with cheese in it, so I sent her a version of my ricotta cheese bread using fresh milled whole wheat and Kamut flour.  I was going to add some potatoes just to make it extra special, but unfortunately they had a mind of their own and decided to hide from me in the refrigerator. I used my favorite black smoked sesame seeds for the top to give it a little extra flavor. I didn't have time to take photos, but Yippee was nice enough to take some awesome shots and shared them with me for this post. This bake really turned out nice and makes for some great grilled bread or as Yippee illustrated it makes a mean brined wild salmon sandwich. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. [caption id="attachment_5103" align="alignnone" width="839"] Yippee's Brined Wild Salmon...yum![/caption] Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, Ricotta Cheese, olive oil and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
click to enlarge
I was checking out my bookmarks to see what to make next and Antony Power’s Irish Stout, oats and cheddar cheese sourdough really appealed to me. I scaled it for 3 loaves, used a bit more whole grain, added a bit of yogurt and changed the method to follow my usual procedure. I hope it turns out as well as his. Soaker 180 g oats 300 g stout beer (Sawdust City Skinny Dippin' Stout) Dough 720 g Unbleached flour 200 g high extraction (sifted) Selkirk wheat flour (270 g Selkirk berries) 100 g high extraction (sifted) Rye flour (120 g Rye berries) 600 g water 26 g Pink Himalayan salt 30 g yogurt 250 g Levain (procedure in recipe) 125 g 2 Year Old White Cheddar, finely cubed Extra unbleached flour to feed the levain Mid afternoon the day before: The night before: Dough making day: Baking Day I’ll let the pictures speak for themselves. 😊
I keep making much to much starter and my fridge has been littered with glasses and jars of left over starter. I had one left to use up and this is what came out.  I had 100 grams of starter that hadn't been fed in a week and no plan. It kind of all worked out. I fed it 1:1:1 and then added another 600 g of water and 800g of unbleached bread flour as that's all I have in the house right now. Based on last week's bake and the impact oat bran had on creating a soft crumb I decided to add some steel cut oats to this bread. I added 100 g with 70 g of very hot water to soak while I got everything ready. I then thought about all the posts I see with rice so I thought I'd use some red rice I had and cooked, cooled and then added 125 g of that too.  I was hydrating some old and too try almonds and thought why not - so they were thrown rough chopped and added too at 40 g.  Thinking of Sarah Owen's spelt honey oat bread I've made in the past I decided to also add 50 grams of local raw honey to the bread too. All in the recipe turned out to be (inclusive of the starter) 100% bread flour, 86% water, 13% cooked red rice, 10.5% steel cut oats, 5% honey, 4.5% hydrated almonds chopped and 2.1% salt.  I started making the final dough around 5pm yesterday afternoon, used a proofer box and didn't get to shape them until about midnight - by then the dough had doubled. Ideally this was a same day bake given the amount of starter, but it was late. Into the cold until this morning - 10 hours later. They were left too long before the bake but didn't fully collapse on me. I baked them in a dutch oven that was a bit small for how much they had expanded by morning. This was a VERY sticky dough and hard to work with - very slack because of the hydration and I didn't have time to develop much structure.  Next time I'd bake same day, work on creating more structure with folds, I'd double the almonds, reduce the hydration to about 75% and maybe increase the honey to 7.5% given the rice is a bit bitter. That said, this has a very nice firm crumb that has a great resistance when being pulled apart and a nice mouth feel. It's nicely moist, and on the edge of too moist but isn't. I'd play with this idea again at some point. I threw some flax seeds on the bottom of the baskets too. Considering I used a week old starter without a feed build-up and no plan, I'm happy with it!
It I got to take a great class with Sarah Owens yesterday. I learned many new things. It was grand to hang out with other bread geeks for a few hours.
It is a bit less than a month till May the 5th but we will celebrate on May the 4th a Saturday instead.  That way folks that come into from out of town  can fly in in Friday after work and fly home on Sunday I live in a lake community called the Islands in Gilbert and there is a community park right next to the lake with Pavilions where we can stretch out,  I'm checking to see if we can have wine and beer outdoors or we will have to have it at my house next to the pool. A guy across the street has an Air B&B right on the the lake that is 2,800 SF that will sleep 8 if you want go in on a place close by for a couple of nights on the cheep.  We are 20 minutes from the airport and Scottsdale and 10 minutes to the fun in downtown Gilbert which is hopping on Friday and Saturday nights. Lucy is serving her best Mexican food so Saturday is covered for food.  She will have beer and wine too and might make her famous Prickly Pear Margaritas for the faithful.  If you walk across the street to sleep it off then no worries about driving! If you want to bring your favorite bread then suit yourself.  will will have the cheese and wine to go with it. Send me a RSVP by PM on this site so Lucy can start to get ready.  The mire the merrier.  Cinco de Mayo is all about celebration and I'm ready for one!  How about you?
Sourdough Bread: April 8, 2019 David Snyder This is another hybrid bread. It differs from my last bake in the following ways: I substituted a low-protein white whole wheat for the Turkey Red wheat used previously. I decreased the total dough hydration to 72% because of the lower protein content of the flour mix. At the lower hydration level, the dough was still significantly slacker than the previous bake. It was also remarkably more extensible. Total Dough Tot. Flour=1163g Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 147 13 AP flour 668 57 Whole Wheat flour 116 10 Whole Rye flour 116 10 Whole Kamut flour 116 10 Water 833 75 Salt 23 2 Total 2019 177 Starter Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 110 88 Whole Rye flour 15 12 Water 62.5 50 Firm starter 62.5 50 Total 250 200 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Ferment at 76ºF for 8-10 hours. Refrigerate for 12 hours or up to 3 days. Note: I have maintained my 50% hydration starter with feedings as previously described – a bit of rye and the remainder high-protein flour – with feedings about 3 times per week. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 668 WW flour 116 Whole Rye flour 96 Whole Kamut flour 116 Water 750 Salt 23 Starter 250 Total 2019 Procedures Place the flours and water in the bowl of a stand mixer and mix at low speed to a shaggy mass. Cover the bowl and let it rest (autolyse) for 1-2 hours. Sprinkle the salt over the surface of the dough. Add the starter in chunks. Mix at Speed 1 for 2 minutes to distribute ingredients then for about 9 minutes at Speed 2 to develop the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Shape into a ball. Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment at 80ºF for about 3 hours with stretch and folds at 50 and 100 minutes. Divide the dough as desired and pre-shape as balls. Cover and let rest for 10-30 minutes to relax the gluten. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Cover or place in food-grade plastic bags. Proof for 2-3 hours at room temperature until the loaves have expanded by about 50%. Refrigerate for 12-40 hours (The longer the cold retardation, the more sour the final loaf). Remove from refrigerator. Check on degree of proofing. Proof further at 80ºF, as needed. (May need 1-3 hours.) If adequately proofed, proceed to scoring and baking. Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 20 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 10 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 20-35 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. I divided the dough into two 250g pieces that were shaped as baguettes and baked after proofing for an hour and two 715g pieces which were shaped as bâtards, proofed at room temperature, retarded for 40 hours, proofed at 80ºF for another hour and 45 minutes then baked. The baguettes were good but lacked in flavor compared to the retarded loaves. The bâtard had a more complex flavor and was a little tangier. It was missing the unique and prominent flavor I have come to associate with Turkey Red wheat. It is good, but I have come to enjoy the flavor contribute of whole grain red wheat and miss it in this bread. We'll see how it tastes for breakfast tomorrow. I do want to experiment more with the low-protein white wheat, but perhaps not in a pain de campagne type bread. How about scones? Happy baking! David
I have been baking terrible loaves lately. They were like more discs than loaves. I  decided to throw out time watching and feel the dough instead. Switched out the stainless steel pan for a cast iron skillet to generate all that steam. Abe was really encouraging with his pointers. I learned plenty from Trevor Wilson's Breadwerx and videos. And from Full Proof Baking (she has amazing hands) videos. I think I am almost there. Regular Bakers Percentage Recipe 100% bread flour (i ran out of wholemeal flour)2% salt20% starter (100% hydration) 72% water 6 hours autolyse with salt added. Hand mixed the starter in. The rest of the process below is a guess as I did not track. I only recalled I did the autolyse on Friday, mix on Saturday morning before heading to work, baked on Monday. SnFx2 with 20mins interval.Bulk ferment in fridge. Remove, shape, back into the fridge again. Bake direct from fridge at 240dc, 20mins with steam. Reduce to 230dc, 20mins. But I dozed off and the timer didn't go off, I think it actually baked at 230dc for 30-40mins.
I always enviously looked at posts on IG and here when I saw marbled loaves. They remind me so much of baking "Marmorkuchen' with my Mum and evoke some of that feeling making it as a bread. I remembered a thread where Dan experimented with chocolate malt. I could not get any so just used some dark roasted Barley malt instead with some cocoa nibs that I had in the larder and grounded. I mixed a Champlain, halved dough after 7 hours AL and then added salt and developed in different containers. This loaf from Trevor is like an old friend now and I use it as the basis for so many of my baking experiments with it's lovely ratio of spelt, rye and white flour. Bulk was approx 4 hours or so at 76F with 2 -3 folds and I folded the two doughs gently together at the last fold and then let the dough bulk for another hour or so... Pre-shape, 30 min bench rest Final Shape, 45 min ambient proof and then 12 hours in the wine cooler at 4C I was very happy with this as a first attempt...The taste just has a hint of cacao and quite a hearty taste from the malt....   I must try this again.... Kat
Starting with CedarMountain Unfortunately, I don't seem to have made any notes of the fermented soaker bake. Pretty sure that I used my basic 70% hydration, white (with 10% whole wheat) loaf, 25% rye starter at 100% hydration. Probably about 150g of oat soaker at a 1:2 ratio, with a handful of seeds for good measure. Also sifted out 12g of bran from the whole wheat and added that with 9g of water to the soaker. I do have a vivid recollection of many, many SLAFs (CedarMountain, you could've warned me!), trying to get the dough to come together. It finally did, just enough to liberate my hands, so I stuck the dough in the fridge overnight, hoping to firm it up a little. It did, sort of. But was still a very slack and tacky dough. Pre-shaped as best I could, bench rested, shaped, coated with flax and nigella seeds and plopped into their baskets. They rose pretty well, albeit without ears. Crumb was soft (and stayed that way), crust was thin and crunchy, taste was mild and "wholesome" without feeling like it's supposed to be good for you. Obviously still need to work on my shaping! Oat soaker in an Abe DNB It looks like I baked these three days later, although have absolutely no recollection of the bread, except that I gave it away (but to whom?). Instead of fermenting the soaker separately, I made up the oat soaker a few hours before adding 350g water and 20g rye starter to it, mixing that up and pouring it over 500g of flour (10% T150 whole wheat) and 10g of salt and let the whole thing ferment for about 12 hours at room temp. It's so rare that I make boules, I should remember who these were given to, but I'm drawing a total blank. But my big discovery was using sourdough instead of yogurt in my favorite yogurt cake recipe. This one got all kinds of things thrown at it: Swapped out half the flour for 25% cocoa powder and 25% ground almonds; replaced half the yogurt with 130g of starter, threw in some frozen cherries… it worked! Then there was a quick visit back to the Hamelman five-grain levain, cocktail-sized! I tried an all-rye levain and it looks like I added a handful of cranberries. Love the taste of this one! Adventures in rye Having finally found a source for something called "dark rye", after so many months of being eager to try my hand (and taste buds) at a high-percentage rye bread, I was a bit disappointed to find that there were no "bits" in this supposedly whole-rye flour; the texture is desperately, uniformly fine. This leaves out something like the tourte de seigle, which specifically calls for T170 (in the French recipe), but perhaps gave me a little wiggle room for less-demanding recipes. After scouring through the (too) many recipes bookmarked over the last year, I set my sights on Mark Sinclair's 100% rye for a number of reasons: he is extremely open as to what kind of rye flour is to be used; the levain is done in one stage and used fairly young; process sounded easy enough. And it was 100% rye; I figured if I was going to learn about the pitfalls of making rye bread, I might as well get my feet really wet. It all went surprisingly smoothly; the video of the process was a great help and most reassuring. Of course, I did, once the loaves were shaped and in their pans, send a panicked message to Mini, who very kindly held my hand through the rest. The baking loaves smelled absolutely wonderful. Taste and aroma are great, but I was disappointed in the crumb, which I found too dense and too uniform. I'm wondering if I should add more water, proof longer, or add seeds. Bitten by the rye bug, I decided next on Wally's 72% rye with soaker, figuring that the 28% of a wheat flour would give me the loft and some of the openness I'd found wanting in the previous bake. I don't have high-gluten flour, so just used my usual T65 bread flour. This was a very messy mix, and the first time in this year of baking bread that I thought wistfully about a mixer: I was up to my wrists in the stuff and wound up resorting to the Rubaud method to make sure all the ingredients were properly incorporated. This is indeed a pudding of a dough, that gets scraped/poured into its pan for proofing. Things went rather well, but for the fact that I got into trouble with the descending temps every 15 minutes, so the top and bottom got a bit burnt, but I'm quite happy with the crumb (lead photo) and the taste. Will definitely be doing this one again. And, darn it, my parchment got stuck -- that's never happened before. And a last oat-soaker Abe DNB Just for good measure. Because I knew we were going to be out for most of the day, I mixed everything together and left it on the counter. I took a look at it when we got home and could probably have proceeded to shaping, but I needed to get dinner underway, so stuck the thing in the fridge until later on, then preshaped and bench rested. The shaping was a bit of a challenge, and I was afraid of frisbees, so I shaped as best I could, coated the loaves with seeds and plopped them into these Pani-bois baking forms, which I'd bought for the rye bakes. Thank goodness that worked… Now, what shall this week bring?
A few months ago I posted my version of Abel Sierra’s Tritordeum baguettes, a result of which is posted in the lead photo. Tritordeum, as stated earlier, is a new hybrid grain developed in Spain after decades of breeding and cultivation, and finally coming to market sometime around 2013 or so.  It is grown primarily in Spain, France and Italy and available across a few European countries.  After recalling the posting by Abel I came across a 500g bag in Trieste Italy and gave it a one time bake upon returning home.  My posting in Aug. 2018 is in the link above. In Barcelona last week, I recalled that the worldwide headquarters of Agrasys, the company that promotes Tritordeum, is located there.  Unannounced, I rang the doorbell to their office on Tuesday afternoon, to see if I could register a “complaint" that I had searched a number of small and large supermarkets in the city in a vain attempt at finding the flour on a shelf.  Anton, who answered the ring, came down to discuss why, and we talked shop for a while.  A meeting was underway in their offices, and so Anton was apologetic for not inviting us up. When we returned an hour or so later, he greeted us at the downstairs front door again, this time with a bag of a few sample flours, two packs of Tritordeum crackers and a pair of IPA beers brewed with the grain.  And an offer for a return visit later in the week to come up and meet the staff. Anton had glanced at my TFL blog and stated that he mentioned me to the others in the office.  We returned on Friday, meet the staff and discussed shop.  Still frustrated at not being able to locate the grain in any store, or the Forn Baltá bakery in the Sants neighborhood that once sold the flour over the counter, we were directed to a grain shop nearby where they had a bag of the flour in bulk. Anton, Verónica and the entire staff, right up to the Company CEO, were warm and wonderful and interested in my personal experiment and own interest in the grain.  It was a great experience.  Verónica knew Abel from his baking days Barcelona, and so in a way, the circle was completed, with me having discovered the grain thanks to Abel. All in all, I came home with about 4 kilos of T150 and a few smaller bags of a more refined grain, perhaps a T65. In the interests of “science”, I’ve already converted a 100% hydration AP liquid levain into both 100% and 75% hydration Tritordeum levains.  The three stages of builds for each took place over the course of a calendar day, with the first consuming 10 hours to mature, the second 3 hours and the third a little under 3 hours to more than double.  I now feel that I have built up a strong enough pair of levains with most of the original AP flour winnowed out.  So I'll declare that it is almost a 100% pure Tritordeum levain at this point. The dough was incredibly slack at my singular 70% hydration experience.  But with my planned 80% T150 grain as well as my decision to use 20% strong white flour, and after discussion with the staff, I feel as though I can still maintain a 70% hydration dough and get a less extensible result.  This should yield a dough that is more manageable than in my prior experience.  Time will tell and I’ll post some of my experimental results along the way. A grateful thank you to all of the incredibly inviting people who we met at Agrasys. Verónica, alfanso and Anton: Anton's first "care package" to me: And don't forget the Tritordeum grain IPA: The ~6K of grain now nestled in containers: Shelves at Forn Baltá bakery of "everything" but Tritordeum :-(  : Barcelona is a wonderful city.  One of Antoni Gaudí's first creations: And "just" another doorway in a city graced with exquisite and fantastic architecture.
I don't know if this would be considered a traditional scone - perhaps a variation on a traditional scone?  Scone purists might even consider it an aberration.  I served these to a nice group of women at a Spring tea event a few years ago and several commented on how much they enjoyed the "biscuits", reminded them of scones!  In my thinking scones are more crumbly, tender whereas a good biscuit is fluffy, almost flaky soft...both benefit from minimal handling and lots of butter. For my "scones" today I was using up some extra fresh milled rye, spelt and Marquis wheat flour from yesterday's bread bake mixed with some organic all purpose white flour, baking powder, sea salt, a bit of sugar, some excess starter from yesterday, cubed pieces of frozen butter and enough buttermilk to make a shaggy dough.  I patted it down gently on a floured surface, folded it once and shaped into a round on a piece of parchment paper cut to fit the pre-heated heavy cast iron baking pan I was using and scored the pieces before baking at 400 F for 25 minutes.  Scone or biscuit, whatever you want to call it, they turned out nicely and taste like...a good scone! I served them warm with a wild blueberry preserve; sliced grapes, apples with a drizzle of raw fireweed honey, Sage Derby and Bergeron cheese. ...and this is the bread, started yesterday, cold proofed overnight and baked this morning before the scones - a 20% fresh milled whole grain dough with a coarse ground flax, chia, hemp, sesame, sunflower, pumpkin soaker. Still working on the scoring....
Ken Forkish has a Pain au Bacon that I used to make a few years ago. My daughter mentioned that I hadn’t made any in quite a while so it was time to revisit adding bacon to bread and adding caramelized onions for good measure. The bacon was baked in the oven to make it easier since I was cooking 3 lbs of it! (4 batches of this recipe). 😳 As to the caramelized onions, I make a huge quantity in a crockpot and freeze them in ice cube trays. This comes in super handy since caramelizing onions is normally such a long process. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Add-ins 120 g crumbed bacon (~350 g raw) 85 g caramelized onions (or the equivalent of one large onion) Dough 750 g strong bakers unbleached flour 200 g high extraction Red Fife flour (~250 g Red Fife berries) 100 g high extraction durum flour (~150 g durum berries) 50 g buckwheat flour (50 g buckwheat groats) 825 g filtered water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g plain yogurt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) Extra bran and AP flour to feed the Levain. Early afternoon the day before: Cook the bacon until fairly crisp and crumble it. I cooked mine in the oven to make the process a bit easier. Crumble, cover and reserve. Thaw the caramelized onions if you have some frozen in advance. (Otherwise, slice one large onion and caramelize slowly on the stove with 1 tbsp of olive oil and a bit of butter as well as a pinch of salt.) Cover and reserve. Mill the buckwheat groats for the main dough and place in a tub. Mill the Red Fife and durum berries and sift to obtain the needed amount of high extraction flours. Place the required amounts in the tub with the buckwheat flour. Save the bran for feeding the levain. Reserve the leftover high extraction flour for feeding the Levain in the evening and the next day. Add the unbleached flour to the tub. Cover and set aside. Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g bran. Let rise in a warm place. The night before: Before going to bed, feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g high extraction flour. Let that rest in a warm spot overnight. Dough making day: Early in the morning, feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of durum/AP flour and let rise 4-5 hours in a warm spot. Two hours or so before the levain is ready, put 825 g filtered water in a stand mixer’s bowl and add the flours from the tub.  Mix on the lowest speed until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes a couple of minutes. Autolyse for a couple of hours at room temperature. Remove the caramelized onions and bacon from the fridge and leave on the counter to come to room temperature. Once the levain is ready, add the salt, the yogurt and the levain to the bowl. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed for 5 minutes. About half way through the final five minutes, add the caramelized onions and the crumbled bacon. Remove dough from bowl and place in a covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes at room temperature (73F). Do 4 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals, then do two more sets on hourly intervals. Immediately after the last fold, place the dough in the fridge for 4-5 hours. I was gone for 5 hours. The dough rose ~75%. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~810 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 60 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities or big bubbles. The dough was very poofy! Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Sprinkle half rice/half AP flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Cover with plastic bowl cover or shower caps. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge for 8-9 hours. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Then take the loaves out of the fridge. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 30 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 17 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205F or more. I just had an idea for when I do this again. Perogy Sourdough! I just need to add some mashed potato and some old cheddar cheese, and there you go! Hum... This might happen sooner than later!
These little sandwich loaves are are made with pretty similar amounts of bread, WW and rye flours. They are just right to slice lengthwise, stuff with goodies and then cut in half for two good size sandwiches. Baking these pretty regularly lately. Once the garden starts producing will be even more enjoyable stuff with fresh veggies.
I found this at the well known German bread blog “Plötzblog”. These are little buns with a high rye content common to Southern Tyrol. This is my translation of the German recipe: https://www.ploetzblog.de/2019/03/23/vinschgauer-paarlen/ Typical for this author he uses very precise measurements and specific temperatures. Levain: Starter 16 g Ryeflour (German type 997) 80g Water 80 g @ 50°C Salt 1.6 g Let this rest for 12 -16 hours at room temperature. Autolysis: Wheat flower (German type 550, similar to all purpose flour) 80g Water 52 g @ 20°C, i.e. room temperature Let this rest for 30 minutes. Main dough: Combine levain, the dough form the autolysis plus Rye flour 232 g Water 204 g @ 50°C Liquid malt (inactive) 16 g — I used honey instead Salt 7 g Spices 2 - 4 g (fennel, anise, caraway, ….) He also mentions Schabzigerklee , an herb that grows in this region https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schabzigerklee but again something I can’t get my hands on, just for completeness sake. Mix and let rest for 2.5 hours. Spread dough on a well floured surface and separate dough pieces of 100g, shape into rounded pieces and place on parchment paper in pairs. Let sit for 60 minutes uncovered. The author specifically confirms the uncovered surface in one of his comments stating that it creates the desired rough surface. Bake at 250°C for 20 minutes using steam. I prepared this today, and as you may be able to see the result looks pretty good. Try, if you like Tom.
Mixed Grain Sourdough David Snyder April, 2019 For this week's bakes, I am returning to my variations on Ken Forkish's “Field Blend #2.” The flour mix used is the same as that of several previous bakes, except that the Whole Wheat flour used is “Warthog” hard red Winter wheat. One of the bakers I follow on Instagram swears by this variety, so I though I would try it. What I found right away was that it seems a lot less thirsty than any of the other hard red Winter wheats I have used to date. So I did reduce the hydration slightly and still ended up with a much slacker dough than expected. I made two loaves with this dough. One was retarded for about 20 hours. The other loaf was retarded for about 44 hours. Total dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % All purpose (AP) flour 700 70 Whole Wheat (WW) flour 125 12.5 Whole Rye flour 75 7.5 Whole Spelt flour 100 10 Water 760 76 Salt 21 2.1 Total 1781 180.1 Levain Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % All purpose (AP) flour 144 75 Whole Wheat (WW) flour 36 25 Water (85-90ºF) 144 75 Active Starter (100% hydration) 36 25 Total 360 200 Dissolve the starter in the water, add the flours and mix thoroughly. Place in a clean bowl and cover tightly. Ferment at 80ºF until doubled in volume. The levain can be used immediately or refrigerated for up to 3 days. If refrigerated, I take it out 2 hours before I am going to incorporate it into the final dough. In general, this means I take it out when I am ready to mix the autolyse. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) All purpose (AP) flour 540 Whole Wheat (WW) flour 85 Whole Rye flour 75 Whole Spelt flour 100 Water (85-90ºF) 600 Levain 360 Salt 21 Total 1781 Method In a large bowl, mix the water and the flours to a shaggy mass. Be sure to leave no dry flour in the bowl. Cover and let sit at room temperature for 1-2 hours (autolyse). Sprinkle the salt over the dough and add the levain in 4-6 portions. Mix in with a spatula, spoon or your wet hands. Continue distributing the salt and levain evenly by squeezing the dough repeatedly between your thumb and fingers, alternating with stretching and folding the dough. (Hint: I find that doing this wearing a food service glove which I dip frequently in a bowl of water works very well. The dough doesn't stick to the glove as much as it does to my hand.) Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl and cover it. Ferment at 80ºF for 3-4 hours. Stretch and fold in the bowl at 30 and 60 minutes. Stretch and fold on a lightly floured board 50 and 100 minutes later. Note: I bulk ferment this dough in a Brød and Taylor Proofing Box. If you are fermenting at a cooler temperature, it will just take longer. Do additional stretch and folds hourly to redistribute metabolites and equalize dough temperature. Leave the dough alone for the last hour. The dough should increase in volume to about double and be pillowy. Divide the dough into two equal pieces. Pre-shape as rounds and cover with a dish towel. Let it rest for 10-30 minutes. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Place in food-safe plastic bags (or cover with a damp tea towel). Allow to proof at room temperature for 30-60 minutes, then refrigerate for 8-16 hours. Remove from refrigerator and let sit at room temperature for 1-2 hours, depending on degree of proofing. If baking on a stone, pre-heat the oven for an hour with the baking stone and your steaming apparatus in place. If baking in Dutch ovens (DO's), pre-heat the oven with the DO tops for at least 20 minutes. Note: If baking on a stone, I pre-heat the oven to 500ºF. If baking in DO's, I pre-heat to 475ºF.) If baking on a stone turn down the oven temperature to 460ºF, transfer loaves to a peel, steam the oven, score the loaves as desired and load them onto the stone. Remove the steaming apparatus after 15 minutes. Continue baking for another 30-40 minutes. If you have a convection oven, set it to 435ºF Convection Bake for the last part of the bake. The loaves are done when they are darkly colored, sound hollow when the bottoms are thumped and have an internal temperature of 205ºF. If baking in DO's, transfer the loaves into the DO bottoms. Score the loaves as desired. Using good hot pads or oven gloves, remove the DO tops from the oven and cover the bottoms. Transfer the DO's to the oven. After 30 minutes, remove the DO covers. Continue to bake the loaves for another 20 minutes. Remove the loaves from the oven and place them on a cooling rack. Cool completely before slicing. Note: These times and temperatures assume 900-1200 g loaves. If using this dough for smaller loaves, use higher temperatures and shorter bake times. If baking larger loaves, use lower temperatures and longer bake times. The loaf that had been retarded for 20 hours was tasted after completely cooling. The crust was crunchy. The crumb was tender. The flavor was complex, sweet and moderately sour. A very delicious bread. The loaf that was retarded for an additional day seemed a bit over-proofed. It had a weaker gluten sheath and spread more when transferred to the peel. It had less oven spring and less bloom. The crust did brown well though. The texture of the crust and crumb were the same as the first loaf. The flavor was somewhat more sour but also less complex to my taste when first tasted. The next morning, as usual, the flavors had melded and improved. Now, I would not conclude that a 40+ hour cold retardation is a bad idea in general. For this particular bread, it did not provide an improved result. Not bad bread, but the first loaf was better, at least to my palate. Happy baking! David
If you are looking for a quick and fool-proof method to create a starter that has a high concentration of lactic acid, check out Rus' CLAS procedures on YouTube and Blogger. Mind you though, the formula uses commercial yeast ("CY") to boost leavening power because CLAS is yeast-free.  If you're a hard-core purist who does not use CY,  this method is not for you. Thanks to Rus for sharing this opening technology with us! 100% Rye pH @ 1500 hr @ 2400 hr pH @ 2400 hr, it's ready for bread making pH after refreshment; acidity continues to increase
I decided to take another shot at this lovely recipe from Wally, and made a double batch. Merely added 10g of home-made, improvised bread spice and followed recipe and timing. The bread smelled lovely as it was baking, and it was so hard to cool the loaves and then swaddle them in linen for two days. But it was worth the wait. Crumb is chewy, moist and fragrant, with a delightful nubbiness from the seeds. Crust is crunchy-chewy, although I'm not sure how long that will last. For me, this recipe is a keeper! Also made a Trevor Wilson sandwich loaf that went amok: I'll have to try baking this one again to figure out what went wrong… I won't see this crumb unless Nina remembers to take photo.
A while ago, A&B Naturals, the local store that sells my breads on weekends, let me know that the "lunch crowd" were hungry for some nice rolls to go with their smoothies. Since I like trying out new things and find it rather boring to always bake the same breads, I jumped at the chance to test some new recipes for rolls that had been on my to-do list for a long time. Viewing my flour supplies, I decided to go with kamut, an ancient wheat with a lovely golden color and delicate, nutty taste. Adapted from a recipe of one of my bread baking heroes, Richard Ploner, the crusty rolls surpassed my expectations - and "the lunch crowd" at A&B's loved them, too! The kamut flour is soaked for 24 hours, and, for optimal taste (and least hands-on work), I allow the dough to slowly ferment overnight in the fridge. Therefore, plan on starting the preparation 2 days before you want to bake. For the recipe and procedure, please, follow me on my blog "Brot & Bread"
I've been enamored of Kamut and recently I've been making a bread w 25% Kamut ( sometimes with just whole grain, sometimes with 1/2 Whole grain and 1/2 White Kamut).  I've liked the crisp crust and the lovely rise. The flavor hasn't been quite as full as I like even when I was using just whole grain. Recently I added just 5% rye and it hit the sweet spot for me.  Nice oven spring, crisp crust and a lot of flavor.  I find that Kamut really needs a lot of time to rise properly and often I need to adjust around it's quirks.   But totally worth it.
http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/39628/sprouted-4-grain-sourdough-chacon-walnuts-and-sage
I have been quite lazy over the past couple of weeks buying my hot cross buns from the local bakery. I finally decided to get busy and bake a batch. The recipe I used was Floyd's recipe which I searched on this site and uses commercial yeast. I normally use a natural yeast starter, but have also been lazy of late in feeding my starter. Next batch of buns perhaps. Happy baking and Happy Easter! Ski
On today's installment of cooking with Pop-Pop, we will take you through the steps for reviving Slo-Mo from his golden, albeit chilly refrigerated slumber, and prepare for a bake. For this exercise, we will need the following. 60 g of sleeping wild yeast @ 100% Hydration 1- 4 cup Pyrex glass storage container with a lid 1- 1/2 Pint Ball canning jar with a lid 1- slender mixing spoon 1- digital scale Bread flour UN-chlorinated Water. Step 1- Weigh 20g of the starter into the 1/2 pint jar (This will be your reserve.) Step 2- weigh the remaining 40g of starter into the 4 cup container (This is the "mother" for our dough build) For the next step, we will be mixing in equal parts of flour and water into our starter. The goal here is to keep the poolishes/ levain at 100% hydration. The simple equation to accomplish this is: Equal parts Flour + Water + Starter = 100% Hydration example: 20g Flour +20g Water + 20g Starter = 60g Starter at 100% hydration. Step 3 Using the formula above mix up your two batches of culture one to reserve for next time and one to be the mother of our bread. Be sure to mix the ingredients until all the flour is wet and the poolish looks smooth. Step 4 Cover and set both containers aside in a warm place (72-74F,) check in on the progress after about an hour or two. Step 4 Once you see signs of fermentation activity (bubbles on the surface and a sweet nutty aroma) you can put the 1/2 pint jar into the refrigerator. Allow the 120g of mother starter to continue to ferment until the next feeding (about 12 hours.) In actuality, I did not save enough starter on Thursday, leaving me with only 45g of mother to build on. Here is the 60g reserve just before it went back in the refrigerator. As you may have noticed this technique leaves us with no waste/discard to deal with; very clever indeed! To be continued.....
This is basically a Pain de Campagne but with a bit more whole grain. I figured that a fairly plain loaf, meaning no add-ins aside from the flax, would go well with an Easter Dinner meal. Recipe: The afternoon before:
Overnight Country Brown — Happy Easter Tom
Hi Friends! After a yeasted bread baking hiatus, I've been trying again to learn to make bread with 100% home milled whole wheat. It's going a bit better this time. I'm using Peter Reinhart's "Whole Grain Breads" with enough resulting success to keep baking. It helps that I'm currently feeding a household of two adults and three 18-year-olds on a tight budget! Past me was kind enough to purchase lots of nifty tools, like a grain mill, a pizza stone, a Dutch oven, etc etc, so I can make bread for the price of the grain in my local bulk bins (pretty darn cheap.) Here is a picture of 50% hard red winter, 50% Kamut brand khorasan wheat, with chia seeds added. This is PR's recipe for whole wheat focaccia, with two modifications: chia seeds added, hydrated separately as how Janet described in her chia sourdough post; sifted-out bran,  hydrated with boiling water before cooling and returning to the dough. The khorasan makes the dough very strechy. I was expecting a more open crumb but probably over-handled the dough making the boule and degassed it. Nonetheless I was very happy with the crust, crumb, and flavor. I have also subsequently used this same dough to make two long loaves, more like ciabatta style, which came out (slightly) more open, with an extraordinary sweetness to the smell of the crust. I have no idea why.
A bit of background about me, I quite new to bread baking having only really starting this year and having some success following the methods of Peter Reinhart in Artisan Breads Everyday for commercial yeasted breads.  I decided that I would like to try sourdough and if I was going to do that I would also try my hand at making a sourdough starter. My first attempt didn’t seem to work out, I followed Peter Reinhart’s instructions from Artisan Breads Everyday, but after several days and little apparent activity I gave up and started again. My second attempt I followed Peter Reinhart’s instructions for a seed culture again and things were going fairly well, however, the phase 4 seed culture seemed to have only a bit of vigor.  After two days in phase 4, I decided to discard all but 100 grams of the seed culture, which had a very pleasant acidic smell and then added 100 g of water and 100 g of unbleached bread flour.  I am hopeful that this will become more vigorous with regular 1:1:1 feedings.  I should say, I didn’t really know any better and started this with all purpose whole wheat flour that wasn’t organic.  I will keep this one fed and going and see what happens. Now my third attempt, but this time with Sourdo Lady’s instructions found on this site.   I found some organic sprouted rye flour at Whole Foods and decided I’d use this flour to make a seed culture.  Hopefully third time’s a charm. I will try to update with photos in the next days of my adventure.
Oppssss.  Mabel is very shy and doesn't want her pictures posted.  She is a cutie for sure though!
My wife and I recently finished a vacation with two days in San Francisco.  We decided that visiting bakeries was a good way to navigate the city and see some new neighborhoods (at least new to us). First stop was Acme Bread in the Ferry Building.  A wide selection, and I opted for a sour baguette.  Definitely a nice sour flavor.  Excellent crumb and crust.  This was good to munch on, and was the leader in finding a sourdough with the classic taste.  (We decided not to get anything from Boudin, so I cannot comment on their bread, but they do seem to be everywhere.) Next was the Mill (aka Josey Baker Bread).  The photos posted on TFL showing a strong dark bake are representative.  Again a fine selection available, and I chose another baguette.  Really great flavor in the crust.  The crumb was good, but not as distinctive as the crust.  The atmosphere at the place was great too, with classic rock being played (from vinyl LPs no less). Lastly for the first day was Arizmendi.  My wife got a slice of pizza, and I purchased a standard batard.  After two baguettes (and other food) already that day, I had no room for more bread, but I did take the loaf with me on the plane ride home.  A nice crust (great blisters) and crumb.  Certainly a solid bake, and no complaints. The next day we began at the original Tartine.  Knowing that we would be going next to the Manufactory where the bread is now baked, I chose a Pain au Chocolat, and my wife had a croquette.  Both were superb.  Hard to think that the little hole in the wall was where Chad Robertson set up shop and achieved his following.  We then walked to the Manufactory, which is spacious and has a different vibe.  For about an hour I stood and watched the team making baguettes.  First the giant dough mixers, then the dumping of the dough, the pre-shaping, and then the final shaping.  One person in particular made shaping a baguette look like child's play.  Then we went into the main restaurant area, where I had a bowl of soup and some bread (a portion of a Basic Country loaf).  Superb bread.  Great crust and crumb.  Easy to see why Tartine bread has become so popular.  We got a loaf of the Country Bread to bring home. If you are in San Francisco with some time to explore, it is simple to traverse the city via the excellent public transit system.  We got a day pass and used our smart phones to find what bus we needed to get from one place to the next.  (Thanks also to those of you who have posted suggestions of bakeries to visit in San Francisco.)
So decided to dive right in and give cristal Bread a try. Not sure if I got it but damn this bread is tasty. Crispy, light and just the right amount of chew. Would love to hear everyone’s feedback. Thanks
You wouldn't believe these full-flavored, cute little rolls fermented for only about two hours! Amazing CLAS thanks to Rus! I used my homemade red rye malt for the first time in this bake, and I'm so proud of myself! 😌😌😌 P.S. How to revive a frozen roll (102g) to get a crispy crust and soft crumb: microwave on power 1 x 30s, then toast @450F x 4-5 mins. Let cool for a minute before serving.
This was my first attempt to make a bread that uses a straightforward single dough, rather than the biga-plus-soaker method in the Peter Rinehart ww book. I was inspired to make this bread after reading so many posts here on TFL about this book, especially txfarmer's posts. I wanted to learn about proper, full gluten development in a 100% ww dough. This bread was a great learning experience for me. I did finally achieve a true windowpane. And the way that, in turn, affected the dough handling, and the way it held on to the gas bubbles, was totally eye opening. I learned that I need to be much more thorough in my degassing for this style of bread. I also learned I need to be more careful not to get excess flour on the dough when I'm degassing and shaping. There is a jelly-roll spiral of dry flour in the loaf. Altogether I'm very happy with this bake and what I learned from it. (It tastes good, too!)
Busy night/morning.First, I am drying some of my sour culture for future generations to enjoy. Not quite dry yet coming along nicely. Next we have overnight batter, sourdough, 100% whole grain waffles. (Whole wheat, spelt and rye) with no added sugar. You can not buy these for any price! Light as air and the whole grains give a natural sweetness! Still to come sourdough English muffin dough is fermenting as we speak! Last but not least, the main attraction,Whole grain Oat porridge bread. The bread has been cold fermenting since 9PM last night, set for a 9PM bake tonight!
Sourdough Bread: April 25, 2019 David Snyder This is basically the same bread I baked on March 22, 2019. The changes are to use whole wheat rather than rye in the starter and to substitute spelt for the rye and some of the all purpose flour in the final dough. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 147 13 AP flour 653 56 Whole Wheat flour 15 1 Whole Rye flour 121 10 Whole Spelt flour 234 20 Water 769 65 Salt 23 2 Total 1962 147 Starter Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 110 88 Whole Wheat flour 15 12 Water 62.5 50 Firm starter 62.5 50 Total 250 200 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Ferment at 76ºF for 8-10 hours. Refrigerate for 12 hours or up to 3 days. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 653 Whole Rye flour 116 Whole Spelt flour 234 Water 686 Salt 23 Starter 250 Total 1962 Procedures Place the flours and water in the bowl of a stand mixer and mix at low speed to a shaggy mass. Cover the bowl and let it rest (autolyse) for 1-2 hours. Sprinkle the salt over the surface of the dough. Add the starter in chunks. Mix at Speed 1 for 2 minutes to distribute ingredients then for about 9 minutes at Speed 2 to develop the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Shape into a ball. Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment at 80ºF for about 3 hours with stretch and folds at 50 and 100 minutes. Divide the dough into two equal pieces. Cover and let rest for 10-30 minutes to relax the gluten. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Cover or place in food-grade plastic bags. Proof for 2-3 hours at room temperature until the loaves have expanded by about 50%. Refrigerate for 12-40 hours (The longer the cold retardation, the more sour the final loaf). Remove from refrigerator. Check on degree of proofing. Proof further at 80ºF, as needed. (May need 1-3 hours.) If adequately proofed, proceed to scoring and baking. Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 20 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 10 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 20-35 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. Today's loaf was cold retarded for 40 hours then proofed at 80ºF for about 80 minutes before being baked. The crust is crunchy. The flavor is lovely – complex with a pronounced acetic acid tang. This is the most sour bread of my current series of experiments. It is rather similar to the March 22 bake. I cannot discern to absence of the rye. Even right after cooling when first tasted, the flavor was well-balanced. Happy baking! David
I've made a similar bread in the past with cranberries instead of cherries but I also changed the flour up a bit and added some fresh milled rye. I thought the crumb would be more red, but you definitely could taste the wine and of course cherries make the perfect compliment.  Adding some chocolate would make this a great bread to have with some cheese for dessert. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Soak the cherries (if using dried) in the wine or water until soft and strain out. Mix the flours  and the wine along with the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, and olive oil and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Add the cherries last and mix for about 30 seconds until incorporated.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Our very own Dan Ayo has organized another bakefest, so of course I couldn't resist. Especially since I've become a fervent convert to oatmeal soakers/scalds and have been wondering about the difference between pouring boiling water over oats and letting them cool overnight, and actually cooking a porridge. So this seemed like the perfect opportunity to do so. Like Kat (NaCl), I looked over Maurizio's recipe, which got me thinking that I needed to hedge my bets. Maurizio's formulae tend to call for strong flours, much stronger than what I can get here. To make matters worse, the protein level in my go-to T65 bread flour -- from one bag to the next -- went from 12% to 9.9%! There was no way I was going to be able to hoist myself up to a 13% protein level with the flours at hand. Not wanting to resort to VWG, I was already feeling kind of stuck, until I opened the fridge and remembered that I hadn't tossed the little lump of dough that I removed from the proofing stage of a midweek bake. So I decided to use that as a pâte fermentée, in the hopes of adding a bit of strength to the dough. So that was hedge n°1. Having read all the comments about the stickiness of the dough, and knowing from experience how absolutely gloppy a soaker dough can be, I opted to add the porridge at the same time as the salt, so as not to challenge whatever fragile gluten might have developed in the autolyse. And there was hedge n°2. Other than that, as we see so often on TFL, "I followed the recipe to a T". Well, sort of. My oats, despite covered cooking over low heat, were quickly getting very dense and solid, and I was afraid to add more water. So they did not cook for the 16 minutes as directed. Made my young levain in two stages, then "pseudo-autolysed" it with the flours and the water, holding back the quantities that Maurizio recommends. Then came the final mix, with the salt and the porridge, which I first incorporated with pincering and folding and then did 20 minutes of SLAFs until the dough came together. Very sticky, very extensible, not elastic at all. Had I not already experienced what an oat soaker can do to dough, I probably would've started worrying. But I let it sit and then did a first STAF at 30 minutes -- still very stretchy and sticky, with very little elasticity. I missed the STAFs at 60 and 90 minutes for scheduling reasons, then caught up with myself later on. By the end of the five or six stretch and folds, it was getting on to about midnight so I decided to retard the dough overnight, then shape and bake the next day. I was also hoping that the dough would firm up a little to make shaping a little less tricky. After being removed from the fridge, the dough sat out for a couple of hours, by which time it looked and felt like it might be workable. Did two preshapes and a final shaping. Despite the fact that the loaves didn't spread as much as I'd feared, I decided to do myself a favor by plopping them into low-sided wooden loaf pans. Baked at 230° for 20 minutes, then 210 for an additional 10 minutes with cover. Don't you just love/dread that moment when you remove the cover from your roaster/DO? An additional 20 minutes uncovered at 200°C. I was very eager to slice open a loaf this morning. The crumb is amazing; soft, supple, almost shreddable, with a wonderful, mild and wholesome taste. Crust is thin and crackly. I can (and did) eat this untoasted with nothing on it, it was that good! I will definitely attempt this one again, maybe trying one loaf free-standing to see how badly it spreads. Earlier in the week Have become totally enamored of Wally's (Larry) rye loaf, I made another double batch, adding 10g of bread spices and swapping out 20g of T80 high-extraction flour in the bread-flour part of the formula. Just thought I'd document some of the steps, if anyone else would like to give it a try. I love my starter. The rye sour had a nicer, rounder dome, but I dropped the bowl and sort of compacted things :-o This is the clay-like dough after mixing Scraped into pans and topped with seeds and flour After an hour or so, almost ready for baking After 75 minutes with steam, starting at 230°, then stepping down to 210° and 190° at 20 and 35 minutes. They've been cooled and wrapped. One has been reserved and is in the freezer; I'm not sure when I'll cut one open, since I've got the porridge bread to eat too! But the kitchen smelled wonderful during the bake. Yum! EDIT: Some newbie notes I may be repeating/stating the obvious, but since I gather that I'm not the only one who's been intimidated by the prospect of making rye bread, here are just a couple of thoughts, based on a few bakes of this bread: EDIT: Crumb shots OK, it was too hard to resist, and I guess I'll just have to double up on my bread eating. I'm really happy with this crumb and the taste, love that I can slice this to about 1.5mm thin! Those are black sesame seeds; I thought I had a bag of golden ones, but couldn't find them. Now, how can I tweak this? Up the percentage of whole-wheat flour in the bread-flour part of the equation? Use beer instead of water? Once I get a YW going (when it gets warm enough), I might try that… Or should I not tweak? Am now tempted to take a shot at Mini's 104% hydration all-rye…
Here is my latest attempt at the Laurel's Kitchen porridge bread. This one used 1/3 Kamut khorasan, for extensibility; 2/3 hard red winter, for strength. All the flour was freshly milled on the finest Mockmill setting. I used a relatively coarse (kitchen strainer) screen to sift the big bran and added it to the porridge. The oats were run through my mill on the widest setting that would still grab them and beat them up a little. I used my ultrafine Chinese soup-skimmer strainer to sift off the finest, most powdery portion of the milled oats to add to my catch-all tub of 'white' flour and used the rest in the porridge. I did a 1.5 x recipe which used 240g of dry oat and 1,125 g flour. Half was given a single bulk proof, then shaped into buns, proofed, brushed with milk, sprinkled with sesame seeds before baking. They took 15 minutes at 400 F and were soft and delicious, although kind of enormous. The other half of the dough was bulk proofed twice, then shaped as a batard and put into an improvised (cloth lined basket) banneton to final proof.There the bottom seam opened up and I messed about with it and pinched it back together, which ended up tightening the crumb on the bottom of the loaf. I turned it out on a cookie sheet, scored it, and put it in the oven on top of a pizza stone at 450 F with a towel-filled steamer. At 20 minutes I removed the cookie sheet and steam pan. I took it out after another 30 minutes. In retrospect 450 was too high a heat for this moist, honey-enriched dough. By the time the internal temp hit 208, the crust was overbaked and got a little scorched on the bottom at the ends. The crumb is fine, even, soft, moist, and very pleasing. This is a really nice everyday bread for toast and sandwiches. It's also good sliced thin, toasted until crisp, and dipped in coffee. Mandatory crumb shot:
I regretted Toad.d.b since the moment it chose me (I will never confess that I chose it for my TFL username).  Having had a nano-epiphany while composing a post here a few days back, I've gone 'n done it: changed my TFL username to Our Crumb.  And I've adopted an avatar with some ancient family food history. There.  Done. dab, you'll have to call them crumbies now.  Or crumbles.  Or . . . Happy Baking, Tom
Sourdough Bread: April 30, 2019 David Snyder This is basically the same bread I baked on March 22, 2019. The only change was to substitute spelt for the rye and some of the all purpose flour in the final dough. I have been trying different grain blends and anticipate continuing this line of experiments for a while. All the breads have been among my favorites. The long cold retardation really enhances the acid content without resulting in too much gluten breakdown, at least with these flours and this hydration level. Total Dough Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 147 13 AP flour 653 56 Whole Rye flour 136 11 Whole Spelt flour 234 20 Water 769 65 Salt 23 2 Total 1962 167 Starter Ingredient Wt (g) Bakers' % High-protein flour 110 88 Whole Rye flour 15 12 Water 62.5 50 Firm starter 62.5 50 Total 250 200 Dissolve the starter in the water. Add the flours and mix thoroughly. Ferment at 76ºF for 8-10 hours. Refrigerate for 12 hours or up to 3 days. Final Dough Ingredient Wt (g) AP flour 653 Whole Rye flour 116 Whole Spelt flour 234 Water 686 Salt 23 Starter 250 Total 1962 Procedures Place the flours and water in the bowl of a stand mixer and mix at low speed to a shaggy mass. Cover the bowl and let it rest (autolyse) for 1-2 hours. Sprinkle the salt over the surface of the dough. Add the starter in chunks. Mix at Speed 1 for 2 minutes to distribute ingredients then for about 9 minutes at Speed 2 to develop the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured board. Shape into a ball. Transfer the dough to a clean, lightly oiled bowl. Cover the bowl and ferment at 80ºF for about 3 hours with stretch and folds at 50 and 100 minutes. Divide the dough into two equal pieces. Cover and let rest for 10-30 minutes to relax the gluten. Shape as boules or bâtards and place in floured bannetons. Cover or place in food-grade plastic bags. Proof for 2-3 hours at room temperature until the loaves have expanded by about 50%. Refrigerate for 12-40 hours (The longer the cold retardation, the more sour the final loaf). Remove from refrigerator. Check on degree of proofing. Proof further at 80ºF, as needed. (May need 1-3 hours.) If adequately proofed, proceed to scoring and baking. Transfer to a peel. Score as desired. Bake: If baking in Dutch oven, bake at 475ºF covered for 20 minutes, then uncovered at 450ºF for another 10 minutes or until done to satisfaction. Bake: If baking on the hearth, pre-heat oven at 500ºF for 1 hour with baking stone and steaming apparatus in place. Turn down oven to 460. Load loaf and steam oven. After 15 minutes, remove steam and continue baking for 20-35 minutes, until loaf is baked. (Depends on size and shape of loaf.) The bread is done when the crust is nicely colored and the loaf sounds hollow when thumped on the bottom. The internal temperature should be at least 205ºF. Transfer the bread to a cooling rack and cool thoroughly before slicing. Today's loaves were cold retarded for 36 hours then proofed at 80ºF for about 60 minutes before being baked. This bake was quite similar to others in this series. The crust was crunchy. The crumb was mildly chewy. The flavor was complex and very nice with a definite acetic acid tang that did not over-power the flavor of the grains. Happy baking! David
i wanted this bake to be in my blog as well. Please check out the write ups in the post that Danny started. It’s amazing how one formula can be so versatile. The information given to the bakers is so helpful. There are more pics and a full description of my process in the Community Bake.
I adjusted my sourdough starter to 80% hydration rate.  How do I adjust a recipe calling for 100% starter to an 80% hydration recipe or do I need to adjust?  Hope this question makes sense to anyone? Thanks,
(Almost) Maurizio’s Oat Porridge Sourdough Dough flour:
When I began making bread a few years ago it was with a determination to bake nutritious and wholesome bread. What I did not fully understand or appreciate is the broad scope and variety, the many variables affecting the process, the simple and complex beauty of a well baked loaf of bread. And when I think of the countless varations of bread baked over thousands of years it is humbling to realize that each loaf I bake has very likely been baked before by someone else at another time. This was eloquently expressed in a blog comment by Andy (Syd-a) some years ago on TFL: "I suppose the beauty in bread baking is often not the novelty but in the reproduction in as much a beautiful or faithful way to the old recipes and to add your own personal style to it.  I did nothing new with my baking today, but have made some ok bread...but nothing that hasn't been done by greater bakers previously." http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/34207/bread-according-ezekiel-49#comment-262728 So, for today's bake, I too did nothing new but have made some ok bread... nothing that hasn't been done by greater bakers previously! Turns out my idea for today's multigrain, multiseed sourdough bread has been done before by a bakery called Food for Life; they bake Ezekial Bread  (versions of this previously baked/posted by others on TFL; I baked a loaf a few weeks ago to see what it was like; it was ok) and a multigrain Genesis Bread - my bread today is a similar combination of sprouted and fresh milled grains, much the same ingredients but a different approach, as Andy says,  "....reproduction in as much a beautiful or faithful way to the old recipes and to add your own personal style to it" I mixed and autolysed fresh milled, whole grain, organic rye, spelt, Marquis flour with organic white flour; then added sea salt and a young levain to start the bulk fermentation. After the first hour I added a porridge of cooked ground chia, millet, amaranth, quinoa, hemp, flax, sesame, cashews, almonds, basmati rice, steel cut oats, yellow corn, yellow peas, a soaker of coarse cracked pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds, buckwheat and some mashed sprouted barley, oats, khorasan.  I estimate the FDH at 80%.  I cold proofed the loaves overnight and baked directly out of the fridge in pre-heated Creusets; covered 500 F for 25 minutes, 450 F for 10 minutes and uncovered 450 F for 20 minutes to finish.  I like this bread - it is on my short, short list at the top.
As baguettes (long batards),of course.  Covered by wheat bran. Edit 5/18/2019 - And a second run with my adjusted formula to make sure that I understood the process, and because it's a darn tasty bread!  Changes applied: 590g x 2 gros baguettes/long batards End of edit. I was out of state these past weeks when suddenly Dan sneakily posted his Community Bake behind my back.  I’m not big on “challenges” and typically don’t join in as much as I do join in. But there has long been chatter and postings of porridge breads by quite a few of the crew here on Isle TFL, both respected old timers like Ian as well as some of the fine young fillies and colts. Having never incorporated porridge, I though that this would be a fine time to give it a go. I generally try to use what’s already in the cupboard, which in this case was my supermarket branded quick oats.   But for this venture I went with the recommended BRM (not thick). As with Paul’s comments about the consistency of the 1g:2g ratio, “About 5 minutes in, the porridge starts to firm up, losing any resemblance to “creamy” or “loose”. “, and as with a good number of others in this exercise, the words creamy texture were a unknown inside of my sauce pan. The ratio turns out to be a 1:1 volume, but the typical volume measurement for oatmeal is 1:2.  So I did that.  And in my first run, I used that 1:2 volume – which naturally made the entire affair tip toward the goopy side of what dough should be.  Here are the two side by side.  Left is called for in the formula, right is by the oatmeal package instruction.  And even these did not turn creamy. What this reminded me of is the wonderful “magic grits” scene from the movie My Cousin Vinny, and I‘ll quote the relevant sentence here: “Perhaps the laws of physics cease to exist on your (Maurizio’s) stove”. Way overhydrated, I was still able to eke out a semblance of a bake, and the bread was delicious On this second run, I made a few changes: Left: just after releasing steam.  Right: about to pull from the oven They didn’t grigne as much as my typical baguettes, but I am not surprised at all given the unique characteristics of the dough. 2 x 450g baguettes / long batards Here is my (BBGA) version of the formula, also normalized for 1000g
Coated with white and black sesame seeds.. When I saw the other day Leslie's beautiful seeded loaf based on Ru's formula I felt inspired and dived into my books and online and on this site to look at different formulas..as it was time for my weekly 4 loaves bake for friends. In the end I settled for Maurizio's Seeded Sourdough as it included one of my favourite flour: durum... I did not have the fennel seeds or lemon zest he included and left those out and replaced the fennel seeds with white sesame. Otherwise I more or lest stayed true to the formula and did not go rogue...as I often do with forumulas. One think I really like about Maurizio's formulas is that he states the temperatures and what to aim for...that is really so helpful, I find. I used Strong Canadian WW flour being aware of the risk with American formulas and British flours but the rest was Marriages Strong Organic White and De Cecco Durum flour. After much deliberation I also toasted ALL the seed and then put them in an overnight soaker whereas Maurizio did not toast all the seeds. It made a beautiful dough and boy did it taste good! Seeds incorporated during 2nd Stretch and Fold... 30 min bench rest after pre-shape
Made last weekend for the current community bake. Maurizio's recipe was mostly followed as written using KA bread flour (12.5% gluten) and KA whole wheat; bulk fermentation took about 6.5 hours in total at 78F. One deviation is that the porridge was pinched in with the salt rather than folded in. The porridge was also a bit on the dry side. The loaf was allowed to proof in a basket for about 2 hours before being put into the fridge for 8 hours, then baked. The loaf was not exceptionally sour, but it would have gone better with the oats if it had been less so. Apologies for the blurriness of some of the photos below. After mixing in porridge: After the 6th fold (so about 3 hours into bulk): Crumb from a couple of slices near the center (I forgot to document this until I was about to freeze the sliced loaf):
I've been wanting to try milling some dried corn into flour for some time and finally found some on Amazon a little while ago.  For this bake I used around 17% fresh corn flour so it didn't really add much purple color as I had hoped, but it smelled amazing after milling and did add a nice subtle corn flavor to the bake. I had some leftover rice so I added some into the mix along with some ricotta cheese to make a nice soft and flavorful dough.  This one smelled like you could eat it before even baking it! Above you can see the milled four with its slight purple tinge. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. The bread came out great. The crumb was nice and open and moist and tasted fantastic.  This one is a keeper for sure and worth trying.  The nutty flavor of the spelt was really complimented with the corn flour and made for one tasty bread. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, Ricotta Cheese, olive oil, rice and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I considered joining in on the community bake but looking through past ideas, I came across a bake that I had adapted from Mutant Space’s recipe. At the time, one of my friends said was one of the best breads she had ever tasted. It has a lot of similarities to the community bake loaf as it also uses an oat porridge. The notes in that thread were very helpful. I was very careful to cook the oats on low to retain the creaminess. However, this recipe also has honey, butter, flax, sesame and sunflower seeds. I also used  Einkorn as part of the flour as I have quite a bit of it and I haven’t used it much at all. Hopefully it turns out as well as the first time I made it. Recipe Makes 3 loaves of ~975 g 740 oat porridge Porridge 225 g rolled oats 360 g water 90 g honey 75 g butter Add-ins 75 g raw Sesame seeds 75 g raw Sunflower seeds Dough 650 g unbleached flour 200 g high extraction Red Fife flour (250 g Red Fife berries) 210 g high extraction Einkorn flour (250 g Einkorn berries) 75 g flax, freshly ground 550 g water 25 g salt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) 75 g extra water The afternoon before: Mill the Red Fife and  Einkorn berries and sift to obtain the needed amount of high extraction flours. Place the required amounts in a tub. Save the bran for feeding the Levain and for another use such as bran muffins. Reserve any leftover high extraction flour for feeding the Levain in the evening and the next day. Add the unbleached flour to the tub. Grind the flax seeds in a bullet and add to the tub. Cover and set aside. Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g bran. Let rise in a warm place. The night before: Add the water to the rolled oats and cook on low for about 16 minutes. When the porridge is creamy, add the butter and the honey. Stir well and put into the fridge for the night. This can be done in the morning if you wish. Toast the sesame and sunflower seeds in a dry frying pan or in the oven at 350 F. They are done when lightly golden and fragrant. Reserve. Before going to bed, feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g high extraction flour. Let that rest in a warm spot overnight. Dough Making day: Early in the morning, feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of high extraction flour/AP flour and let rise 4-5 hours in a warm spot. Two hours or so before the levain is ready, put 550 g filtered water in a stand mixer’s bowl and add the flours from the tub as well as the porridge.  Mix on the lowest speed until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes a couple of minutes. Autolyse for at least a couple of hours at room temperature. Once the levain is ready, add the salt and the levain to the bowl. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed for 5 minutes. If the dough is too stiff, add the additional water while mixer is running. I definitely needed the extra water. At the end of the 5 minutes, add the toasted sesame seeds and sunflower seeds and mix til incorporated. Remove dough from bowl and place in a covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes at room temperature (73F). Do 4 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals, then let the dough rise for an hour. I normally do another 2sets of folds but life interfered and the dough went into the fridge early. When I got home about 90 minutes later, I gave it another fold and a bit more counter time until I had to go out again, and it went back into the fridge. By the time I got home, the dough was really cold, stiff and had risen about 30%. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~975 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and I let it rest almost a couple of hours on the counter letting it warm up. It still felt pretty stiff when I did the final shaping. Hopefully I will be making bread and not bricks in the morning. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities or big bubbles. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Sprinkle half rice/half AP flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Cover with plastic bowl cover or shower caps. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge for 8-9 hours. I debated letting it proof at room temperature but by this time, it was 2:30 am so in the fridge it went. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Then take the loaves out of the fridge. The loaves didn’t look quite proofed so I let the first batch warm up on the counter for 45 minutes first. At the same time, I took out the second batch out of the fridge to finish proofing so they spent about an hour an a half on the counter. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 30 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 17 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205F or more. Well I was right, these first loaves were definitely underproofed. The first batch ended up with craters and canyons on the surface from the explosive oven spring. I should have also read up about Einkorn first. It would have prepared me for a few of its quirks! 🙄
Following up on my last blog post (from a while ago!), I've finally gotten around to making a 50% home-milled whole spelt sourdough, and I was very pleased with it. As has been my past experience with spelt breads, the bread tasted of whole grain, but less so than an equivalent 50% whole wheat loaf, and I find this milder taste more appealing.As I do for most of my sourdough bakes, I generally followed dmsnyder's instructions for San Joaquin sourdough, albeit with different flours-- the aforementioned 50% whole spelt, and 50% high-gluten flour (Glicks brand).I notice that the crumb is more open on the edges of this loaf. If I want to get the middle of the crumb to be just as open as the outside, is there any obvious change I should be making when shaping? I understand it may be hard to diagnose based on the picture alone.Best,Esopus
There's something about oats in bread that I find compelling! Inspired by the community bake I made Maurizio's Oat Porridge bread. I followed the recipe as written other than to add 25 grams of raw honey to the dough (I just made one loaf). I baked it a bit too hot as I pre-heated the oven at 550 and didn't catch it until 10 minutes into the bake. That said, while the crust was a bit darker than I'd like, overall it turned out well. I tried to load it into the basket with seam side down (to bake on the top) but it was a bit too floppy for me to load the basket keeping the dough skin tight.  I baked it after 10 hours as it was pretty ripe when I woke up. The crumb is moist, firm, fluffy and has a creaminess to it. this is a very nice bread! frank!
Please don't count me as pretentious. I truly do not have delusions of grandeur. However, I have a lot of fun putting my limited knowledge and experience to the test. When I spend hours thinking about a bake before the spatula ever hits the flour, it is like a vacation for my anxious mind. Believe it or not, even writing a halfway intelligent blog entry helps my mild anxiety. Enough about me, this morning I saw a very nice looking Turmeric sourdough Bread, at one of the bread making clubs on FB. The poster did not link or post a recipe. That was enough to inspire, Turmeric sourdough Bread, test bake #1! I am always open to constructive criticism and helpful ideas, that could improve on my own ideas. To be continued: Kind regards, Will F.
Process This was made using King Arthur bread flour (12.5% gluten) and King Arthur whole wheat, and Marizio's process was followed modulo any discrepancies recorded in the notes below. The porridge was much easier to incorporate than the first time because it was cooked more carefully and was therefore less stiff. The oats were cooked in a sealed pot, and were moist and surrounded by gelatinized starch, but any free water had been absorbed. The porridge was incorporated at the same time as the salt. In an effort to reduce the sourness, this loaf was proofed at the high temperature of 87F for 3.5 hours (about 40% volume increase? it is hard to tell). Coil folds were performed at half-hour intervals for the first 2.5 hours. The loaf was then preshaped, rested for 15 minutes, and shaped. Shaping was difficult because the dough was on the wet, sticky, and loose side. The loaf was then proofed for an additional 3 hours at an ambient temperature of 80F in an 8-inch brotform. By the end of the final proof, the loaf's edge was about 1 cm below the edge of the brotform. The loaf was placed in a dutch oven preheated to 475F to bake. The oven temperature was immediately reduced to 450. The loaf was baked for 20 minutes covered, then 25--30 minutes uncovered. Results The flavor of the loaf ws less sour than last time, but still more sour than might be desirable. With careful management of starter and fermentation, it seems possible to get it even less sour. The texture of the crumb was lighter than last time and just as tender. Questions & future work DanAyo has recommended trying yeast water to reduce sourness, which will likely be done in the future. It also seems possible that sourness could be reduced with more careful management of starter and fermentation. Last time, the dry oatmeal made the dough easier to handle. This time, the oats released moisture and made the dough harder to handle. For moister oatmeal, such as was used in this loaf, decreasing the hydration slightly might be prudent. Questions will be posted in the CB thread.
This Rustic loaf is my regular weekly loaf and never misses if I am true to the process. I use instant yeast to make only one loaf at a time. That's what I like about Hamelman's book; you get the bakers per cent and I can rescale one 750 g loaf to suit my banneton.
Back again with more RWC sourdough.  Mostly the same process as I usually use, with a few changes.....  I built my levain using 50/50 AP/Rye instead of my usual WW.  Adjusted the amount of WW in the formula to keep that % about the same.  I used a mix of black and white sesame seeds to keep my loaf from sticking to the towel that lines my banneton.  Here are the details...... 1000g AP flour 205g WW flour 240g Starter (100% hydration) 770g Water 26g Salt Mix flours, water and starter, let rest 30 minutes.  Pinch in salt, do ~20 stretch/folds, then rest 30 minutes.  Repeat s/f, bulk proof ~1.5-2 hours.  Divide, pre-shape, rest, final shape, proof in bannetons for 1 hour @ 75F, then into fridge for 2 hours.  Bake in oven preheated to 475F, covered for 20 minutes, uncovered for 20-25 minutes. Observations: This dough rose well during bulk and final proofing, and felt very light and "bubbly".  I noticed that the outside of the dough seemed as though it had dried a bit, I'm thinking it gave up a bit of moisture to the towel lining the banneton......I don't recall seeing this before, but it could also be from the time in the fridge (I didn't put the loaves in a bag like normal.)  Good oven spring.  The crust seemed duller, more dry than normal, and the bloom seems to show the dryness of the skin that I noticed.  Crumb is a bit tighter than normal, which I attribute to rough handling in final shaping.  Flavor was great, loved the additional flavor from the seeds.  I need to repeat this one to see if it performs the same.  My gut says that the starter was more active with the rye incorporated into the feed, but with so many variables at work with every batch, who knows?!?!?  :) Some pics....... Happy baking, all! Rich
I learned that I absolutely can bake an 18" pizza utilizing an 18" pizza screen. Since the screen keeps the pie rigid, it can be placed directly on an oven rack or on a smaller ( in my case 16") pizza steel. With this revelation, I have reached the size cutoff point for the confines of my home oven. My sourdough crust is working very nicely this particular pie is a 24hr cold ferment. The dough was easy to stretch into an 18" skin and was not overly extendable. 10% of whole grain gives great flavor and a nice bite. Very nontraditional for Brooklyn style, but the wife gives it high marks. .
I began baking bread when I was unemployed and feeling pretty down and out in life. I was searching for something beside triathlon to give me some purpose. Some people turn to church; I turned to my oven. My inspiration came from seeing these beautiful artisan loaves on Instagram and wanting to give it a try. How hard could it be? I began with basic sandwich loaves made with dry active yeast, then moved on to experimenting with putting herbs or nuts in the dough. I was very pleased with the results since it all tasted really good. But something was missing. A couple months after I began baking, my girlfriend Sam and I were visiting a couple friends in New York and I mentioned my recent headlong dive into bread. It turns out one of our hosts had a sourdough starter and she was willing to give me some. I was thrilled! We talked through the process and how the process differs from using commercial yeast. After making a few sad, dense, bricks that were best suited for construction, I started to figure out the process. I can still recall the amazing smell of my first good loaf, and my state of complete wonderment that the natural yeast and bacteria could create this incredible product. Ever since that eureka moment of biting into my first successful loaf, I have been on a sourdough journey to continue experimenting with flavors and flour blends to create healthy and delicious naturally leavened bread. I found that baking has been a great distraction from triathlon and another activity besides the good ole swim/bike/run/day job. Bread is also a great creative outlet where I can express myself through different scoring patterns or blending flours to create a wide variety of delicious bread. Just like triathlon, the more I learn about bread making, the more I enjoy it and want to continue honing my craft. Conversely, there will never be a world championships with bread making so I'm not really chasing professional performance and I'll never be butting elbows with the best in the world. But that's part of what makes bread so much fun. It's just bread.
Time for the weekly bake and I decided that I want to improve  my shaping of a 'torpedo' style loaf with more tampered ends. Not quite there but making a start... Research first and I've found the following bakers on IG which shared their shaping and watched their videos endless times... One is from @mothersoven and very much like a batard shape in BREAD, if I remember correctly...getting that tension right to be able to roll the ends - a bit like baguette -  is tough and will need much more practice... https://www.instagram.com/p/BQFVc8jjKx8/ https://www.instagram.com/p/BmYE3RxB5Th/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link I also had to change my schedule and decided to go with a premix - so mixed with salt using icecold water and then put the cold dough with salt in wine cooler at 12C for the night. Dough temp was 19C at the beginning. Got up at 5AM and added the overnight leaven. This was : 2250g of with 50% Shipton Mill Dark Swiss Flour and 50% Canadian Strong bread Flour 15% levain from overnight fed at 80% hydration 78% hydration (dough felt stiff considering and forgot how thirsty the Canadian flour is...) I used gentle Rubaud when adding levain and also a gentle lamination to warm dough up and then 3 X hourly S & F. I then had to go out and basically the dough was left alone in proofer at 21C. I came home at 11:00 and the dough was ready to pre-shape, 30 min benchrest and 30 min rest in banneton before into 4C wine cooler. It was nice to be able to use the pre-mix and knowing the dough will not turn into soup and also helps with developing that gluten without muscle power with that much dough... Now, all the bread was given away apart from the smaller torpedo loaf  and crumb above...I really wish I could analyse crumb better to learn....I applied @mothersoven shaping and wonder whether my rolling it creates that denser area in the middle? The shaping learning is going to be continued....
I've learned many things in my 60+ years, but one thing gets forgotten sometimes, and that is: Don't do too many things at the same time!  Preparing the dough for (Jeffrey Hamelman's) Pain au levain I was distracted and poured 400ml warm water into the starter, instead of the 280ml.  Thankfully I realized my mistake, and added a 50g mix of rye, and bread flour.  The dough was a little more hydrated than usual, but felt great during the S&Fs, and in to the fridge it went.Long story short:  Baking day oven was on for other things, and I forgot to place my baking stone in the oven.Lodge cast iron DO to the rescue!  In it went.  Temperature increase achieved.  Dough goes in and 55 minutes later...HUGE sigh of relief!
She made it to 15 so Lucy got her promotion to Baker's Apprentice First Class.  She sends her congrats to all the mothers out there on this special day. Lucy celebrated by picking cherry tomatoes this morning.  Mom asked for ribs for dinner and they are dry rubbed in the fridge we wll make some some sausages and maybe so chicken thighs too.
Hello Everyone, This is a short writing about a 60% whole grain loaf baked this morning. The whole grain was a mix of stone ground whole wheat and organic rye, which was let to autolyse with all salt while the levain was building (~8 hours). The hydration during autolyse was about 67% (water to whole grain flour ratio), while the loaf hydration was 75%.  I bulk fermented at room temperature (~ 27C) for 4 hours, and then shoved it in the fridge for another 12 hours of bulk cold fermentation. In the morning, I took the dough out of the fridge, shaped and proofed for 50 min at room temperature, and then baked from a cold oven start and cold pot. I am quite OK with the resulting crumb and crust. My whole wheat flour is quite course, so you can see bits in the crumb. A good autolyse is needed to avoid problems with the gluten network formation. This was a small loaf containing 300 gr total flour (180 gr whole grain), 8.3% fermented flour, 75% hydration, and a dash of honey.
…or: how many variables can we change at once? A few things have caught my attention in the last week or so: So, where to start? Maybe with the levain. This do-nothing bread usually calls for 10-20g of starter, depending on ambient temps. Up until this week, I would obediently mix up a fresh batch, but always felt silly about just making 20g of the stuff, so always made about 150g, using the extra 130g for my yogurt cake. Because of Caroline's experiments, I decided to try using 23g of starter straight from the fridge (the extra three grams was for the porridge). Caroline mentioned a double-boiler for the oat porridge, and all of a sudden I had this flash of a childhood memory of a lovely hotel cook stirring the stuff over a double boiler. So cooked 50g of whole oat flakes in 100g of water that way. I didn't get any sticking, but I didn't get creamy, either. While the oats were cooling, I opened the cupboard and measured out the various flours. I didn't sift, but gave everything a good whisking with salt and seeds.Since I didn't know the protein content of the T80 flour, I only used 200g of that with 200g of T65 bread flour (12% protein). The fine-grind whole semolina was 12;4% protein, and the T110 was another unknown quantity. (In the lead photo, clockwise from bottom left: semolina, T110, black sesame seeds, T65, flax seeds, T80.) I either forgot that I wanted to try something other than water, or decided that I'd already thrown too many unknowns together, so used just room-temperature water. In the end, this is what got tossed together: Method: It occured to me after I removed the loaves from the oven that Caroline also uses her yeast water, which is something I need to get back to. I'm wondering if I could've pushed the final proof a little longer. Will know tomorrow when I cut one open. The other has been gifted. Edit: crumb shot and taste report Crumb is tighter than I'd have liked, which makes me think I could've proofed longer -- or taken Caroline's lead and used yeast water as part of the mix (I shall get around to making one). Or, just feed my starter before mixing into the dough. Because of the oats, the crumb is soft, with little bits of nubbiness from the seeds. I like the taste of this one, so will probably rework this again, maybe starting tonight.
Hi Fresh Loaf community, I'm on a quest to find a recipe for an extremely healthy spelt rye sourdough bread recipe. I'm seeking your input on a recipe guideline. Here's the background:  I've been following this site for more than 7 years and I absolutely love seeing everyone's hard work. While I do a lot of cooking on a daily/weekly basis, I've only successfully baked the classic Tartine Country Loaf on a few occasions. For the last 2-3 years, I've been really eating as close to Whole 30 style as possible (which means no bread). But a bite of a good sourdough bread is one of my favorites tastes on earth! So, I'd like to incorporate small amounts of healthy bread back into my weekly eating program. My main goal is to create a loaf of bread that optimizes health, taste, and cost. Obviously, any form of gluten does not qualify for Whole 30, but I'd love for a nutritionist approve of this bread recipe. I'm going to list why I think a spelt rye sourdough might be best and my thoughts/methods for a quality recipe. I'd love the TFL community's input on all the topics below: Why I Think A Spelt Rye Sourdough Bread is Healthiest: But maybe someone is aware of a healthier bread that isn't too far off from standard sourdough bread prep? Methods/Thoughts for a Quality Recipe: Final Recipe I think my final recipe will look something like this (but would love any kind of input from the community): My recipe inspirations are:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d3qDLrpQh10'Renee's Rye Bread from Tartine No. 3 In honor of meal prep, I'd love to make 2-4 loaves like this every other Sunday:
Crisp scrolls filled with layers of tahini and cinnamon. Easy and delicious. A keeper. The experience is enhanced by listening to Giovanni Gabrieli's brass sonata - pian' e forte
Tritordeum flour experimentation and summary. Recall that Tritordeum  is a recent grain developed in Spain these past few decades and is a hybrid of wild barley and semolina with the advantage of numerous health and sustainability benefits. I returned home from our recent trip to Barcelona with a few kilos of the flour to satisfy my curiosity.  And so it has.  I’ve now run four iterations using the flour with differing combinations.  Hardly a scientifically sustained approach, but enough to give me a notion as to how the flour performs.  The two versions of tritordeum that I have are T150 and T65. I liken the T150 to our Whole Wheat flour and the T65 to our AP flour.  I found the T65 much more suitable for baguettes than the T150. For the first two runs I used 20% pre-fermented flour and then switched to 15% for the final two runs. For the final three runs I “autolysed" the levain as well.  So you can clearly see that I am breaking most rules of scientific research.  But that really wasn’t the point of this exercise.  Not at all. In both mixes at 70% total hydration, the dough still maintained its extensible characteristic although nowhere near my first difficult excursion using this flour last Autumn. In both mixes at 65% total hydration, the dough was more compliant and did not lead to a runaway shaping experience.  I’ll also posit that this dough could much more easily be applied to batard or boule without the minor shaping difficulties I experienced rolling them out as baguettes. Run #1.  Using T150 Run #2.  Using T150 Run #3.  Using T150 Run #4.  Using T65 In summary, I was much more comfortable and confident of the dough for the final run.  The conversion from 70% hydration to 65% made a significant difference in the handling of the dough, as well as the final product emerging from the oven.  The taste is quite good.  I don’t think that the change from 100% to 75% levain hydration made a whit of difference but I had made both in advance some weeks ago in anticipation of using both. I can’t discount the value of repeated handling and familiarity using the flour.  If I were to incorporate this flour into a regular regimen, I would use the 4th and final run as my gold standard.  It just performed beautifully and I think that the 50/50 flour mix at 65% hydration makes this a top quality dough to work with.  Unfortunately the downside is that this flour apparently still has little distribution in Europe and is not approved for sale yet un the US. And again, for those who think that one cannot achieve an open crumb at lower hydrations, here is more evidence that it can be done.
The intention behind this bake was to use enough barley to impart a distinct barley flavor, while having a low enough % to retain a good crumb. I made it 25% barley flour, which I milled from pearled barley from the supermarket (remainder was bread flour, except for some whole wheat in the starter). I also soaked some pearled barley overnight, and added it to the dough at 15%. My verdict: I could barely taste the barley flour. If I decide to try this again, I would significantly raise the percentage. I did enjoy the soaked barley in the bread, although the grains that were on/in the outside of the loaf became quite hard in the oven, which was not particularly pleasant (they softened by the next day).
Here she is with her 15th birthday. buzz cut and new purple - K State bow.  She's the best even if only a First Class Baking Apprentice:-)
The key to success in CLAS is controlling the temperature in every step, and, of course, following Rus' formula and instructions ! Bubbly batter Crepe made with 33% rye, including my homemade red rye malt, which I want to use whenever I can. I made my son's favorite weekend breakfast with Rus' pancake.  Thank you, Rus! I seldom made pancakes, so some of their shapings looked quite weird. Rus asked why my pancakes were so tiny.  I guess these are tiny no more! Guess why and how I used this potato to make the pancakes?  It saved my waistline!
Sourdough crust, 10% Whole grain, (spelt & whole wheat.) Fresh mozzarella, cooked crumbled hot Italian sausage, fire roasted red peppers and parmigiano reggiano.
I had a huge bag of apricots and decided to use them in a bread. Maybe I shouldn’t have bothered. 🙄 I remember another time using apricots and the loaves bombing. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Soaker 125 g Rolled Oats 250 g Boiling Water Dough 800 g Unbleached Flour 200 g High extraction Spelt Flour (230 g Spelt berries) 540 g Water + 50 g 22 g Salt 30 g Yogurt 250 g Levain 100 g Pecans (chopped) 150 g Dried Apricots (chopped and a tsp of flour addd to prevent sticking) Mid afternoon the day before: Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g of bran or wholewheat flour. Let rise in a warm place. Mill the Spelt berries and sift to obtain the needed amount of high extraction flour. Save the bran for the levain or another use. Place 200 g of the high extraction flour in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. Cover and set aside. The night before: Before going to bed, feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g of AP flour flour including any left over high extraction flour. Let that rest in a warm spot overnight. Dough making day: Feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of AP flour and let rise 5-6 hours in a warm spot. Place the rolled oats in a bowl and pour the boiling water over the oats. Cover and let cool. Two hours before the levain is ready, mix the 540 g of water with the oat soaker on the lowest speed in the bowl of a stand mixer until the mass has been loosened up. Add the flour and mix on speed 2 until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes just a minute or two. Autolyse for a couple of hours. Once the levain is ready (mine was starting to recede), add the salt, the yogurt and the levain to the bowl. Mix on speed one for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on speed 2 for 5 minutes. Add the last 50 g of water gradually. A minute or so before the end of the 5 minutes, add the apricots and the pecans. Remove dough from bowl and place in a covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes. Do 4 sets of folds at 30 minute intervals, then do another 2 sets an hour apart. Let rise an additional hour if the dough seems to be developing slowly like mine was. I placed the dough in a warm spot for the last 3 hours as it didn’t seem to be getting puffy and aerated. Place the dough in a cold fridge for 3 hours. The dough rose about 25%. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~835 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest one hour on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for at least an hour on the counter. I let mine go for an hour and 45 minutes or so. This dough is very firm due to the amount of add-ins so it needs a head start on proofing before refrigerating overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. I felt the loaves needed more proofing so I placed them in the counter while the oven was heating. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 30 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 17 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205F or more. Well, I sure hope they taste good to make up for the lack of oven rise! Not terribly impressed at all! They look better in photos than in real life. 🙄 Note to self: Give up on apricots and bread.
Haven't posted in a while, but need some advice, so sharing this over a number of forums for advice. I've been finding my pan loaves are coming out tacky & sticky in the middle.  I don't encounter this problem with my free-form loaves. Did a batch of my house bread (formula below), mixing a soupy "sponge" with some of the flour & placing the rest on top like a blanket.  I left it to ferment for about 3-4 hours at 18-20C/64-69F until the flour blanket started showing cracks from the sponge poking thru.  Mixed the dough & kneaded it for a few minutes, then left it @ room temp overnight (14-18C/57-64F). After the ferment, I shaped the loaf and placed it in a heavy loaf pan to proof (~60 minutes @ 20-22C/68-72F) until it was about level with the top of the pan -- no, I didn't do the poke test :) Into the oven at 450F for 55 minutes, where it's at 200F internal temp.  The sides of the bread felt a bit soft, so I took the loaf out of the pan, and left it in the oven for another 15 minutes. Below are the results -- darkish crust (which I don't mind) and what the thermometer says is done, but still a tad sticky in the middle after cooling for 7 hours at room temperature. Had this happen to a previous pan loaf, so I thought I'd bake it a bit longer to make sure it was cooked.  This loaf is better, but tackiness inside not down to zero. All input appreciated - thanks in advance!
Hibiscus flowers (flor de jamaica) make an extremely vibrant pink/purple tea with some really nice floral and tart flavors.  I'm starting to experiment a little bit more with using other hydration sources instead of water for my bread baking.  I recently baked a loaf of bread that only used a milk stout instead of water and it turned out really good. I was hoping this bread would pick up some of the purple coloring from the hibiscus tea but it really just turned out kinda grey.  I wasn't sure how much hibiscus to use and only used 10g of dried hibiscus flowers in 420g of water.  Next time I'll up that to 30g in a similar amount of water to see if that boosts the color at all. The addition of the lemon zest gives this bread an incredible smell that reminds me a lot of scones.  I was a little hesitant to use the zest since I thought i might be restricted to only making toast with this bread, but it actually made great toasted sandwiches as well. Rather than using my sourdough starter I've been using bakers yeast to quickly turn around some of these experiments. I have my full write-up with more photos and method here: https://alegrebread.com/2019/05/18/hibiscus-w-lemon-zest-bread/ Ingredients: Method: Here are some photos from the experiment:
I've been wanting to get into dark rye seeded breads. I didn't have much time this weekend and found this recipe online and gave it a try.  https://www.occasionallyeggs.com/easy-overnight-dark-rye-bread/  I looked at Stanley's (Rye Baker) recipes but they involved more time than I had available.  The recipe I used called for cocoa powder instead of a dark beer which i wasn't sure about, but without experience thought it might be work. The results are perfectly fine and the bread is nice, but has too much of a cocoa flavour and aroma too it. And if that's your thing, this is a good bread to try - but it's not for me. The recipe gives you the option to use instant yeast or starter, and of course I used starter. My bread also doesn't look as dark as the one posted with the recipe - maybe they used a darker cocoa powder than I did.  Next time I'll try one of Stanley's recipes.
Just throwing something together... a 300g spelt, 200g wheat bread flour, half a cup of yeast water starter, apple yeast water some scalded milk, blob of butter and a decent shake of ground caraway, 10g salt.   Forgot how rubbery wheat dough can be.  Had to let it relax so often!  After bulking, stretched the dough into a two foot long narrow pizza like shape, rest, and cut triangles to roll up. Something different and easy.  Brushed with milk and let 'em rise under a wet  towel.   210°C hot oven with steam. 20 min. "Ding!"        Who cares if da sun don't shine!
We are a bakery ingredients and packaging distributor in Los Angeles, and move significant amounts of both Canadian flours and USA flours. Yes, flours from Canada are different from flours in USA.  The growing conditions in Canada are more favorable for spring wheat.  The colder temperatures during growing season often contribute to better quality starch and protein development.  During baking, the protein and starch quality are better with Canadian wheat.  The starches fuel yeast activity during baking and the better quality proteins provide for better gluten formation during baking, creating over all higher volume bread with more uniform gassing activity leading to overall enhanced characteristics of bread.  The additional and better quality of starches also help with higher water absorption with Canadian flours. The differences are negligible when it comes to taste.  Some of our big moving Canadian flours are high gluten Millennium, Galaxy and Blue Label.  Many key bread and bakery production companies use these flours for hearth breads, pizzas, sour dough breads, dumplings, pita, lavash, naan, baguette, focaccia, and much more. You may reach out with direct question via www.Instagram.com/AmericanaIngredients
Mr. Forkish designed this formula as a hybrid, using a levain and baker's yeast for leavening.  I elected to use only the levain because it was one of two things that I wanted to test with this bake. Some context is probably in order. The recent community bake of Maurizio’s oat porridge bread had left me questioning my flour, my starter, and my own capabilities.  The first attempt, which was chronicled in the CB thread, was an unmitigated disaster and a lot of that was due to one key decision that I made.  The second attempt (and no, you did not see an account of that) stayed closer to Maurizio's guidelines.  The results, while not disastrous, weren’t satisfactory, either.  Let's just say that I have a good supply of altus on hand now. Coming out of that debacle, I wanted to know whether my starter and my flour are performing as they should.  My curiosity about the flour stems from recently starting to mill whole wheat flour from a 5-gallon bucket of nominally hard red wheat that was gifted to me a few months ago.  This bread would give each component, starter and flour, the chance to display their functions without being swamped by other influences. Since I wanted to observe the dough as it fermented, I made the levain on Friday evening before retiring.  On Saturday morning, it had expanded to at least twice its original volume and was full of bubbles.  The formula calls for 360g even though Forkish tells you to make 1000g. I made 400g and called it good. I stayed pretty close to Forkish' process for the autolyse and the dough, although I did employ some slap and folds to ensure that the ingredients were thoroughly combined in the final dough.  One change that I did make was to withhold 60g of water from the autolyse, reasoning that some would be added to help disperse the salt and more would be absorbed during the stretch and folds when woorking with wet hands and a wet counter.  It seemed to have been a good choice. Bulk ferment ran from about 9:15 am to 3:30 pm.  Kitchen temperatures were 68F to 70F.  After shaping, the final fermentation, also at room temperature, ran to about 7:30 pm. The bread was baked on a stone with steam at 475F for 50 minutes.  At this point, their internal temperature registered as 210F so they were removed from the oven and cooled on a rack. They looked like this Based on the oven spring, I could have extended the final fermentation.  Still, I’m pretty happy with the results.  When I cut into the loaf, the crumb looks like this: Could it be more open? Sure, but this will be used primarily for sandwiches so it fits that need very nicely. The crumb is moist and chewy.  The fragrance is tangy and the flavor is about as sour as I care to have.  That seems to be a characteristic of breads with a high proportion of whole wheat flour. The upshot of all of this, aside from having usable bread, is that the starter has proven that it can still leaven effectively. And the wheat does, indeed, appear to be a hard wheat instead of a softer variety that I had begun to suspect.  I can go on with my baking knowing that those two elements aren’t causing problems for me.
Pizza Wednesday...05/22/19 Sourdough / 10% WHOLE GRAIN N.Y. style: Sausage, pepperoni and peppers. So it begins....80hrs. cold ferment, 11/2 hr. bench rest prior to stretch.
After contemplating sourdough for several months, a first try, and fail, at creating a starter, and finally success at nurturing my very own starter, I was ready to bake. Something simple, straightforward, and with little scope for disaster was in order. 1, 2, 3 Sourdough seemed the way to go. I used a generic unbleached AP flour and bulk fermented in cool room temp for 6 hours. Shaped into a round and placed, seam down, in a parchment lined bowl; covered and put in the refrigerator overnight. Pulled from fridge an hour before starting oven preheat. Baked in pre-heated roasting pan at 450. Uncovered after 15, then another 20. I was very pleased with the success of this first loaf. Undoubtedly I will have failures, and hopefully I will learn a great deal as I work with my starter and the doughs she helps me create. I am glad, though, that this first outing was both delicious and confidence boosting. I am so grateful for all the amateur and professional bakers who so generously share their wisdom and experience.
There's no rational explanation for why I've been trying to make purple bread, but that's what I've been doing lately.  In this batch I mashed a purple sweet potato and added it to the flour.  The color is definitely purple, leaning slightly toward pink. The flavor of the sweet potato is subtle but it gives the bread a hint of sweetness and that soft pillowy texture you associate with potato breads.  The crumb is a little dense but that's to be expected when you add mashed potatoes to a bread. Ingredients: To make the sweet potato mash, I poked a few holes in the potato with a fork and baked it at 350'F for about an hour and a half until it was soft when poked.  I skinned it and mashed it with a fork.  Once it cooled to room temperature it's ready to use in the bread. I used a stand mixer to integrate the potato, flours and water.  This started out really goopy so I had to add more flour (accounted for in the ingredients above). I did a 30 minute autolyse, 5 hour bulk ferment at room temp (w/ 4x folds in first 90 minutes) and then an overnight proof in the refrigerator.  I baked at 450'F for 38 minutes covered and 14 minutes uncovered. I have a full writeup with more photos and instructions here: https://alegrebread.com/2019/05/23/purple-sweet-potato-sourdough/
Time: 4 Days Yield: 2 Loaves For feeding starter Unbleached all purpose white flour (preferably organic) Purified water For making bread Whole wheat flour (preferably organic) Unbleached white bread flour (preferably organic) Salt (preferably non-iodized) Water Extra flour for work surface Vegetable or olive oil for bulk fermentation Kitchen scale 2 glass jars (for starter) Rubber spatula Medium and very large mixing bowls Large wooden spoon Plastic wrap Bench scraper Paper towels Handheld sieve 2 bread proofing baskets Multiple cloth towels Parchment paper Dinner plate Lame (Bread scoring knife) Dutch oven Cooling rack 1) Feed Starter Starting 2 days before bread making, remove starter from fridge and begin feeding. Each day leading up to the feeding it should be fed. To feed, in a medium mixing bowl, combine 20g starter with 100g purified water, and dissolve the starter into the water using a rubber spatula. Next, add 100g unbleached all purpose white flour and mix until there are no dry spots. Put into a glass jar with lid lightly placed on top (not screwed on), then let sit until next feeding. Two jars of starter should be made if the feeding is leading up to baking sourdough. Note: If feeding without intention of baking, simply let starter sit for 2 to 3 hours after feeding then return to fridge. Feed once per week. 2) Autolyse In a very large mixing bowl (Glass or metal), combine 250g whole wheat flour, 750g unbleached white bread flour, and 750g water. Mix well with a large wooden spoon, cover with plastic wrap, and let sit for 30 minutes to 2 hours. This step develops glutens in the dough Note: During this time the starter should be checked for readiness. To do so, fill a small bowl with water and using a spoon, put a small dollop of starter on the water. If it floats, the starter is ready for use. 3) Make Dough Remove the plastic wrap from the bowl that autolyse was done in. Measure 200g starter and pour into bowl of dough. Pinch starter into the dough using middle and index fingers and thumb until mostly combined. Add 20g salt and 50g water and mix until combined using hands. 4) Slap and Fold Remove dough from bowl. On a clean and unfloured surface, lift dough all at once, with bench scraper in one hand, and slam it onto the surface, allowing it to fold onto itself. Repeat for 5 minutes and dough is less slack. This step helps to achieve the desired texture for the bread. 5) Bulk Fermentation Clean the bowl used for autolyse. Lightly oil it using a paper towel. Put dough into the bowl and cover with plastic wrap. Put into an oven with the light on and let sit for 30 minutes. After 30 minutes, remove from oven, pick up dough using oiled hands, and gently lift it up so that it stretches and fold back onto itself. Fold 2-3 times, then recover bowl with plastic wrap and return to oven. Repeat this step 6 times for 3 hours. (3 hours of proofing and 5 rounds of folding). This step helps to rise the dough and achieve a good crumb in the loaf. Note: It is recommended to feed the starter during the first 30 minutes of bulk fermentation. If you are planning on making another batch the next day, then feed two jars and let it stay out until the next day. If you wish to return it to the fridge, feed into one jar and let it sit for 2-3 hours, or until bulk fermentation has finished, then return to fridge. 6) Basket Prep Put two cloth towels into the bread proofing baskets. Pat them down so they match the concave of the basket. Put the extra flour into the sieve and heavily dust the towels in the area where they hug the baskets. Also, during this time cut two pieces of parchment paper the size of the dutch oven, you will use these tomorrow. Note: This step can also be done during bulk fermentation. 7) Preshaping After bulk fermentation, gently remove dough from bowl onto an unfloured work surface. Using a bench scraper, estimate the middle of the dough and cut into 2 equal sections. Using a lightly floured bench scraper, swoop under the edge of the dough in a circular motion, gently coaxing it into a circular shape. Give a medium dusting of flour on top of it, and put a towel over it to rest for 10 minutes. After resting, remove towels and flour the surface just behind the two pieces of dough. Using a bench scraper, gently and quickly flip the dough back onto the floured surface. Gently tug the top bottom and sides of the dough out to elongate them and flatten them slightly. Fold the bottom of the dough up towards the middle, the sides in, and the top down. Pull pieces of dough from the sides and stretch them up to the seam and stitch it together by pinching and twisting the dough simultaneously. Do this a series of times along the whole seam of the dough. After, turn the dough over to rest on the seam and attach to itself. This process allows for the gluten to stick to itself and strengthen the bread and dough. Let the dough rest on the seam for 2 minutes. After resting, quickly flip the dough into the basket using a bench scraper, making sure to leave the seam side up in basket. Flour the top of the dough and fold the excess flaps of towel over the dough to cover. Put in the fridge overnight. 8) Baking In the morning. Preheat oven to 500 degrees and set the dutch oven in the middle of it. Let the dutch oven sit in the oven for 1 hour to heat up. Put the round piece of parchment paper on a dinner plate and flour it. Once one hour has elapsed remove one loaf from the fridge and turn out onto the plate with the parchment paper on it. Using the lame put multiple scores in the loaf, this will create nice ridges in the crust during baking. Remove dutch oven from oven, remove lid and slide the parchment paper with dough on it into the dutch oven. Put the lid back on the dutch oven and put it back in the oven. Bake with lid on for 15 minutes, this helps to create a crispy bubbly crust. After 15 minutes, remove lid and bake another 30 minutes with lid off. Remove loaf from dutch oven after baking and put on a cooling rack for two hours. Repeat process with second loaf. After the two hours of cooling, the loaves are ready for consumption! Note: I recommend serving right after the cooling, and with room temperature salted butter.
A while ago I bought back some Swiss Ruchmehl from Germany and was curious about the flour as Max Kugel, in Bonn bakes a lot with it in his bakery... Last time it turned out to be an amazing bake and sadly I could not get my hands on it in UK.... But my fortune changed when I spotted Dark Swiss Flour on the Shipton Mill web site. It did not give much information but when I baked with it, indeed it was very similar to the Ruchmehl, I thought... The other day I saw a formula on https://brotokoll.com/recipe/?lang=en blog and after contacting Alex, he confirmed that indeed the Shipton Mill Dark Swiss Flour is a Ruchmehl... It is difficult to find information in English on the flour but it is like a 85% extraction flour that is not quite WW but darker than a strong bread flour....The taste is rustic and deep...although I mixed it with 25% Strong Organic White Marriages and 25% Strong Canadian flour. I might try it 100% next bake...and I think it will take more water easily... This one was 78% hydration, 20% young leaven (ph 5 when I used it), 2 % salt.. , 2 hours autolyse, 30 min before adding salt after adding levain, slap and folds to develop gluten, 3 Stretch & folds and last 1 and 1/2 dough was left alone, pre-shape, 30 min benchrest and 30 min before going into wine cooler... It was a warm day and tried to keep dough at 23C throughout whole process. I can highly recommend this flour should you be in the UK and use Shipton Mill. No postage if you order min of £ 30 and lots of amazing flours there at a very good price!   Kat
15% Rye flour + 1 tbls finely chopped coffee chaff.
Growing up Friday's meant pizza in my parents home, along with some very cheesy, terrible family TV viewing.  It is a habit - the pizza, not the cheese-ball TV - that I have come back to again and again. Sourdough Pizza crust (based on KA recipe) 100 grams starter discard; 65 grams warm water; 155 grams unbleached AP flour; 1/2 teaspoon salt; 1/4 teaspoon dry yeast Rise in oiled bowl till doubled, 2-4 hours. Turn out and form into disk, rest 15 minutes. Stretch to shape; let rise. Preheat oven w/ stone to 500F, cook 12-14 minutes, last minute under broiler. I like the crispness this dough can achieve in my oven, and how well it holds up even when very thin. It is also very extensible and easy to stretch. However, I'm missing a bit of chew so I'll probably try some kneading next time. Toppings today where jarred sauce (meh), olive, onion, pepper, GimmeLean sausage w/ added Italian sausage spices, Daiya cheese.
Both of these bakes were pretty simple for me and I had to restrain myself from adding some cheese or other ingredient :).  Sometimes simple is best and I have to admit the Spelt Barley loaf tastes awesome.  It has a nice chewy crust with deep nutty flavors from the spelt and barley flours.  It made an excellent pastrami sandwich for lunch the other day with some melted cheese and Thousand Island dressing. The rolls came out nice and soft with an extra tang from the buttermilk.  These are also excellent sandwich rolls or great for breakfast with some butter, cheese or jam. The crumb was not exceptionally open, but perfect for sandwiches. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. The bread came out great. The crumb was nice and open and moist and tasted fantastic.  This one is a keeper for sure and worth trying.  The nutty flavor of the spelt was really complimented with the corn flour and made for one tasty bread. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water(buttermilk for the rolls) for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, (honey for the Spelt-Barley Loaf) and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees (for the rolls I baked at 435 F).  Bake for 35-50 minutes (15-20 minutes for the rolls) until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
Hi all. Sorry it's been so long since I was active on the site. After our big trip to Australia and New Zealand last autumn, then Christmas, we decided to sell our house. It took a while to get it ready to sell, and part of that 'getting ready' was storing all my bread-baking equipment away out of sight, and not baking for customers anymore. The house is still on the market so I'm just baking for the family now. The bagels shown here are a modified version of Peter Reinhart's bagels from "artisan bread every day", with the addition of some whole wheat flour and sunflower & sesame seeds. I find it's easier to control the ferment and proof if I refrigerate the bulk ferment, then shape them the next morning. They proof fairly quickly so make sure you've got the water simmering and the oven pre-heated in time! Anyway, good wishes to everyone here and I do have a peek now and then to see what everyone is doing! Wendy
I already has bagels on the mind for this weekend when Lazy Loafer (Wendy) posted up her lovely batch yesterday.  So, I dove into the deep end, and took my first go at making sourdough bagels.  I did some searching, and decided to go with THIS RECIPE (posted by Quantum.)  I modified the levain build slightly (favoring a 1:5:5 build up), and also did the bulk proof in the fridge overnight.  I'll cut to the chase on the results......they ARE bagels, but they are a bit denser than even a typical NY bagel might be.  I think that's because I got into shaping, boiling and baking too soon after I took the dough out of the fridge.  On the next go around, I'll probably leave the dough to sit on the counter for a couple hours after they come out of the fridge.  Here are the details...... Formula Levain Build: 31g mature starter from fridge 155g Flour (used freshly milled hard red spring) 155g Water Let levain ferment for 10-12 hours Dough: 753g Flour (used Gold Medal AP) 377g Water 339g Levain 19g Salt "Dissolve" levain and salt in the water, then add to flour in a mixing bowl.  Bring everything together into a cohesive dough mass (it's a bit dry, but it will happen!), then knead for 10-15 minutes (I did this by hand, so if you have a mixer, make adjustments here.)  Once the dough has become smooth in texture, place into an oiled container, and proof at room temp for 1-2 hours.  Then put dough into fridge overnight.  Remove dough from fridge in the morning (this is where I will let it sit for a couple of hours next time), and get your boiling/simmering water ready to go.  I used hot tap water, and some dry malt extract (eyeballed it).  Now is also a good time to preheat your oven to 500 degrees (I baked these on a stone.) Divide the dough into 12 equal portions (about 122g each), pre-shape into balls, then let rest for a few minutes.  Take each ball and roll it out into a cylinder about 8" long, wrap the cylinder around your hand (seam on the palm side), then roll the seam to seal.  Once all of the bagels are formed, simmer them in your water for about 1 minute per side (do this in batches sized according to the vessel you are using.)  Remove from the water, press into whatever toppings you might be using, and place on parchment paper that has been lightly sprayed with cooking spray.  Slide the parchment onto the stone in your oven, bake for 20 minutes.  If they aren't dark enough for your tastes, bake a bit longer. Remove from oven, cool, then slice, toast and enjoy! I'm looking forward to eating these, and then giving this recipe another go with some tweaks. Rich
Make the ghee roasted carrots. Heat the ghee and 3 green cardamoms over medium heat. Remove the cardamoms after the ghee is infused with their flavor. Pour in the carrots and milk powder then sauté over medium high heat, until mostly dry and caramelized. I got 26 g toasted carrots from 100 g raw carrots, 1 tsp milk powder and 5 g ghee.Make the ghee roasted carrots. Heat the ghee and 3 green cardamoms over medium heat. Remove the cardamoms after the ghee is infused with their flavor. Pour in the carrots and milk powder then sauté over medium high heat, until mostly dry and caramelized. I got 26 g toasted carrots from 100 g raw carrots, 1 tsp milk powder and 5 g ghee.
So, DanAyo suggested that I pick one bread to bake again and again as a way to build my skill at baking with 100% freshly-milled while wheat flour. I'm using a variation on the Laurel's Kitchen Bread book 'Loaf for Learning.' The difference are that I'm using spelt and khorasan wheat, and adding a tablespoon of Russian rye sour CLAS for added flavor and a little acidity in the dough. I'm using these wheats because I suspect that there's something wrong with the hard red winter wheat I've been getting. Today was my first bake of this bread. Here is the recipe: Note: This is the Basic WW, page 80 in Laurel's Kitchen, using the hydration from Breadtopia Spelt/Kamut sourdough recipe plus CLAS for flavor.(Total 68% hydration not counting the CLAS.)Dry Ingredients387 g kamut (43%)513 g spelt (57%)(900 grams total flour)7 g  (2 tsp) instant dry yeast14 g (2 1/2 tsp) salt-Whisk dry ingredients togetherWet Ingredients612 g warm water2 tbs honey2 tbs EVOO 40 g (2 tbs) CLAS-Whisk wet ingredients togetherFinal DoughMake a well in the center of the dry ingredients. Pour wet ingredients in. Mix. Let stand for 10 minutes, then adjust hydration if needed. The dough should be soft and very sticky, but have some body: not be wet and gooey like a batter.  Kneading:Knead by hand, about 20 minutes, using the method in the Laurel's Kitchen book. The dough should remain soft and become elastic and smooth. Towards the end of kneading it should be lustrous, supple and elastic. The color will be pearly, with darker bran flecks. It should display windowpane after a 10 minute bench rest.1st Bulk Fermentation:Form the dough into a smooth round ball and put it into a big clean bowl to rise. Do not oil the bowl. Protect the dough from drying out by placing a platter or plastic sheet over the top of the bowl.* COLD BULK: place dough in refrigerator overnight.* WARM BULK: Keep it in a warm, draft-free place to rise. At about 80 degrees this will take about 1 1/2 to 2 hours, at 70 degrees, about 2 1/2 hours.Wet your finger and poke it gently into the dough, about 1/2 inch. If the hole does not fill, the dough is ready. For best results, do not wait until the dough sighs deeply when poked.2nd Bulk Fermentation:Leaving the dough in the bowl, gently press out all the accumulated gas. Tuck the sides under to make the dough into a smooth round again, and cover for the second rise. The second rise will take about 1/2 as long as the first. Use the finger-poke rest again to test the second rise.Shaping, Panning, and Final Fermentation:Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface. The best way to remove it from the bowl is by gently pressing a rubber spatula around the edges, and turning the bowl over. Cut the dough in half using a bench knife.  Keeping the smooth top surface carefully unbroken, deflate the dough by pressing it with wet or floury hands or a rolling pin from side to side, expelling the accumulated gas. Form each deflated dough half into a smooth round ball. Let the balls rest, covered, for about ten minutes. Shape dough into loaves, place into two greased 8 x 4 loaf pans. Preheat oven to 425 F. Place panned loaves, covered, in a warm draft-free location for the final rise. After 30 to 45 minutes, the dough should touch all sides of the pan and arch over the top. The dough will be spongy but not soggy and a gentle indentation from your wet finger will fill-in slowly. Baking:Place pans in the hot over. After 10 minutes, reduce the heat to 325 F. Bake for 45 minutes to an hour, until the bread registers 195 to 200 F.The loaves should leave the pans easily and be an even golden-brown, with no pinkish areas. If you thump the bottoms with your fingertips they should sound hollow.
There are so many wonderful things about this bread, I don't know where to start. It's buttery like laminated dough but infinitely easier. It's actually fun to make. It's sociable, pull-apart, tear 'n' share bread. And it's a showpiece with a huge 'wow' factor.Jewish breads are usually excellent, this one is the traditional bake of the Yemenite Jews. If you want to look at the details, here's my recipe link: kubaneh, yemeni bread Those black bits are black onion (nigella) seeds.
As bakers, we spend a lot of time on the "How" and very little time on the "Why". When we do bring up why, it tends to be why we do things in a particular way (e.g., which temperature to proof a particular dough) rather than why we choose to make a particular style of bread. I do not see thoughtful discussions of why people decide to learn to make baguettes.   Home bakers seem bake them because commercial bakers bake them, and people are in the habit of eating them, and so people like baguettes. Then, home bakers, bake what people like. For the baker, baguettes have virtues. They are easy to make, and use inexpensive ingredients that are easy to store and handle.  And, baguettes are cheap, go with a wide variety of modern French foods, so people are in the habit of eating baguettes all the time, and there is a large demand for baguettes. Together, these points make baguette and similar attractive to  commercial bakers.  However, the home baker can consider the costs of medical conditions associated with eating white bread such as baguettes, and suddenly baguettes are not cheap. I understand the large demand for baguettes. People often ask me to make baguettes.  Those people are coming down with diet related diseases.  For them, the “Pain de Campaign” that is only ~20% whole grain flour is not an answer. It is still 80% “ultra-processed-stuff". And that ultra-processed-stuff will still do a job on their bodies. The virtues of baguettes for bakers do not help the eaters.  Why do home bakers continue to bake and feed such stuff to their friends and family? (HABIT) We are not greedy commercial bakers - we do not need to sell air to make a living. We can “sell” cake! We can use the whole grains to make breads with the kind of crumb that whole grain makes, and it will be just as good as baguettes or the stuff sold as Pain de Campaign.  It will be different, but it will be just as good. Yes, we need to present our bread with a flourish (e.g., sell) that tells people that it is better than the junk bakers make from ultra-processed-stuff and sell as bread. Whole grain excels at fine, moist, tender, "crumb" - that is pretty much the definition of cake.  Let them eat "cake"!   It is healthy. The classic American whole wheat bread recipe calls for milk and honey.  Together, whole wheat flour, milk and honey tend to produce a texture that is more like what we think of as "cake" than the baguette texture that we think of as bread.  Or, whole wheat flour with a bit of rye, handled as sourdough produces a fine moist, tender product that does not look like many of the things that modern bakers call "bread", but which is very pleasant to eat. These are the breads that I routinely bake. Some of my favorite whole grain flour mixes contain 10 different ingredients including soy beans or garbanzo beans. And, there are a whole range of sourdough breads that are mostly rye with just a bit of wheat in them - that are moist, tender, and cake like. Perhaps the extreme is Borodinsky bread. I have been asked to bring the “bread” to a reunion gathering in a few weeks. There will of course be baguettes, and other nutritional nothings made from mostly white flour. However, there will also be Borodinsky bread, and a variety of whole grain breads that contain no white flour.  We are old friends, and these are the breads that we will eat together.
I got a bee in my bonnet the other day about making a simple loaf of 50% whole wheat sandwich bread.  Nothing special, just a good solid bread for toast, sandwiches and the like.  One thing I wanted to do was to keep the level of effort fairly minimal (somewhere just above using the bread machine....) :)  I read a bunch of different recipes, and this is what I came up with: 300g AP flour 300g Whole wheat flour 366g Water 30g Milk 1 Tbsp butter 1 Tbsp sugar 14g Salt 1.5g ADY I mixed together the dry ingredients (including yeast), whipped the butter into the water/milk with a fork (got lots of little globules), then mixed the wet and dry together until everything was incorporated.  This was at about 9pm, and I left it in the mixing bowl, covered overnight.  At about 6am, I pulled the dough out of the bowl, and it was nice and soft, a bit puffy, and quite sticky.  With a light dusting of flour and my scraper, I pre-shaped it, then let it rest for about 30 minutes.  Then I did a final shaping, and dropped it (gently, of course) in a greased loaf pan.  It took about 3.5 hours for the dough to rise over the level of the loaf pan, at which point, I cooked it in a 425 degree oven for about 35-40 minutes (temp was 200 when I removed it.)  Let it cool, and sliced it the next day for a toast test.  Pretty tasty stuff!  Nice moist crumb, soft and tender, and very wheaty! I'd like to get a little more loft to this one, so the next version might use a bit more flour, or a longer final rise.  Possible flavor tweaks would be to use honey instead of sugar, and maybe oil instead of butter to see what impact that might have (I'm guessing not much, they are pretty small additions anyway.) I consider this a success -- low effort, solid sandwich loaf, and look forward to tweaking this one a bit more.  Maybe I'll even take more photos next time! ;) Thanks for looking! R
Preferment/Levain - 339g 31g Starter from fridge 155g Freshly milled Hard Red Spring WW 155g Water Dough 753g AP Flour 393g Water 339g Levain 25g Sugar 19g Salt Total Dough - 1488 Total Flour - 923 Total Water - 563 Total Hydration - 61% Process: Build levain, and let rise at room temp for 10-12 hours (not quite what I did, as I was building levain for two bakes) Mix levain with dough water in mixing bowl, then add flour/salt and mix together well Knead 10-20 minutes, or until dough is soft and smooth Ferment at room temp for 1.5 hours, then overnight in the fridge Remove from fridge, scale to 120g, and form bagels Allow to proof on parchment lined baking sheet for 1.5 hour Simmer in water (with malt powder) for 1 minute per side, remove and top if desired Bake at 475F for 35 minutes on baking stone Remove, cool, slice, eat
A pair of loaves from a couple of weeks ago. One was made with poolish and the other with pure sourdough. Sourdough Loaf Followed Maurizio, except as noted. Process Make leaven at a 1:2:2 starter:flour:water ratio with half whole wheat and half white flour; ready after 4 hours Mix 249g bread flour (KA 12.5% gluten), 99g WW (KA), 100g levain, 241g water Rest 45 minutes, then add 9g salt and 9g water Rest 45 minutes, then pinch in porridge 5 folds at half-hour intervals, then bulk 3.5--4 hours at 79F (estimated 50% volume increase) Preshape, rest for 20 minutes, shape, allow to proof until ready, then bake Results It was hoped that increasing the amount of leaven would lead to a faster bulk and hence a milder acidity in the final product. The bulk ws faster, but acidity reduction was very small. The crumb is depicted in the header. Poolish Loaf Process Make leaven at a 1:2:2 starter:flour:water ratio with half whole wheat and half white flour; ready after 4 hours Make poolish with 1g active dry yeast, 25g WW, 25g water; ready after 2.5 hours Mix 262g bread flour (KA 12.5% gluten), 87g WW (KA), 50g poolish, 50g levain, 241g water Rest 45 minutes, then add 9g salt and 9g water Rest 45 minutes, then pinch in porridge 2 folds at half-hour intervals, then allow to bulk around 75 more minutes at 79F (estimated 80% volume increase) Preshape, rest for 20 minutes, shape, allow to proof until ready (about 1 hour), then bake Results The yeast seemed to make the crumb slightly stiff, which was unfortunate. However, the flavor was pleasantly mild, allowing the oats to come through clearly. An image of the crumb is below. Failed yeast water An attempt at yeast water was made by cutting up an apple, adding it to some water in a jar, and then allowing it to sit covered on the counter. After a few days, there were a few bubbles, but then everything got moldy and began smelling bad. It will be tried again sometime; any further tips are appreciated.
I’ve been drooling over the beautiful breads that David has been producing with extended retardation and his description of “severely yummy” was very enticing. So I stayed true to his recipe and method aside from using strong bakers unbleached flour for all the white flour and adding 30 g of yogurt to tenderize the crust. The whole grain flours were freshly milled and I used Selkirk wheat berries for the whole-wheat. I did not sift out the bran as per my usual practice. The first batch was retarded 17 hours and the second batch a bit more than 18 hours. Here is the link to David’s recipe: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/59782/todays-bake-3312019#comment-435200 The loaves are super light and had really good oven spring. I can’t wait to see the crumb and taste it.
Earlier this week Abe sent to me a link of the just published Cinnamon Raisin Sour Dough on Maurizio Leo’s The Perfect Loaf.  In a move of unusual rapidity for me, I built a BBGA spreadsheet entry for the bread and concurrently fed my levain in preparation. As is often the case in the alfanso household, I went rebel and turned his posted tapered batards into baguettes.  How unusual for me!  But I wasn’t finished there and made some changes to the whole process.  As follows: And then made the rookie mistake of retarding the mix at the 2 hr. mark, when I was intending for a 3 hour bulk rise.  Realizing this hours later, I pulled the dough from the refrigerator, gave it a final Letter Fold and let it rise for 2 hours on the counter figuring the warming up of the dough after two hours would compensate sufficiently.  And I suppose that in the end I was right.  Or lucky. Then back to retard for a few hours more before divide and shape, couche and then return to retard once more for several more hours.  Not as much grigne as I would have liked to have seen, but based on the photos posted by Maurizio, I think that I did quite okay here.  The crumb also looks to be quite nicely opened. Certainly a tasty bread, almost dessert-like, and sure to find it’s way into my selected Wheel of Fortune down the road.  The crust is not as crisp as I would have preferred but certainly has more snap to it than a soft crust bread, say, a potato bread. And just as a reminder to those who haven’t yet ventured beyond precisely following the trail laid out by the original poster of a formula and gone rogue - It is okay and even recommended to do so.  Once you do it, it is no longer someone else’s bread it is yours!  And you will learn something along the way that you may not have known before.  I do.  All the time.  Try it, you’ll like it! 400g x 3 baguettes/long batards
Today I started an experiment to see if I can make a wheat-based (or mixed wheat and rye) version of Concentrated Lactic Acid Sourdough (CLAS). I wanted to see if I could get the flavor and acidification benefits of the CLAS without using as much rye flour in the mix. My reasoning is that rye makes the dough more difficult to handle, and the 100% whole wheat breads I make are already quite challenging for me. Another way to say it is I wanted to be able to add more CLAS without adding (as much) more rye. Also, I just thought it would be interesting to see if it works. If anyone is interested I can post my procedure for following the method that Andrey (AKA) Rus Brot published for starting a CLAS from scratch. Or you can just take a look at his blog here: https://brotgost.blogspot.com/p/clas.html My impression is that if you have access to organic whole-grain rye flour and a way to tightly regulate the fermentation temperature, your odds of success are very high. I found it to be straightforward. Once you have an established CLAS ferment/starter, you can add it to bread. Like any starter it is kept alive by refreshment, that is by removing some of the ferment and adding new flour and water. Note that CLAS is maintained at 190% hydration. The standard formula for 90% CLAS refreshment is: This 1:9 refreshment is the smallest amount of CLAS to new feedstock that Andrey recommends. The water, flour, and CLAS starter are mixed thoroughly, placed in a loosely lidded container, and held at lactobacillus fermentation temperature (105°F ± 35°F) for 12 hours. I use an Instant Pot on Yogt setting. For this experiment I used a 75% (1:3)  refreshment: I made two batches. One with coarsely ground rye flour (the regular/control batch) and one with coarsely ground hard red winter wheat (the experimental batch.) I put them into wide-mouth 1-pint mason jars, loosely lidded, and placed them both into the Instant Pot on Yogt setting for a 12 hour ferment. tomorrow I'll check them out and see if the wheat one gets as sour as the rye, and how the flavors compare. My established rye CLAS ferment smells and tastes clean, fresh and tart. It is similar to a sour apple flavor with emphasis on the sour rather than the apple.
Our winter arrived very, very early and with a bang. Blizzard conditions in the alpine areas nearby and flash flooding and gale force winds at home. I packed a fire and spent the day baking. These came out of the oven first. A quick, one rise recipe. I took a few pictures immediately, because they are not going to last. Recipe here: http://www.mymoroccanfood.com/home/2015/8/15/moroccan-semolina-bread-fig-and-tahini-pinwheel
We keep real milk in the house during the winter, but during the summer, we switch to soy milk. (In the summer we like fruit smoothies, and soy milk makes a better smoothie.) With soy milk and a little extra (peanut) oil, one can make a decent "American" whole wheat bread.  In the old days, I would have used a can of evaporated milk. It is not as good as real American whole wheat bread made with real milk, but it is good enough that not everyone will notice the difference, and if they are not accustomed to your good fresh breads, they will be grateful for having nice fresh home baked bread.  (Remind them that rich flavor and dense texture are virtues of the design and production - not defects.)
I make a lot of Hamelman 50%-whole-grain-with-a-soaker breads.  They often look quite similar but taste pretty different depending on the grains and soaker ingredients used.  This time was a pleasant surprise, as the depth of flavor is more than I hoped for.  The 28 hour cold final rise also helped with flavor development. Grains:  6oz WW berries, 5 oz kamut, and 4 oz Øland landrace red wheat from Capay Mills, "a very rare wheat from Denmark, brought to the US by Claus Meyer, of NOMA fame," according to the owner, David Kaisel. Soaker:  Boiling water poured over rye meal, old bread cubes, and faux red rye malt (The Rye Baker way, i.e., malted rye berries toasted and ground to a fine powder); cut with a pastry cutter the following morning to avoid large bread chunks. The hydration is lower than I usually do, which made shaping exceedingly easy, and resulted in a pretty tight crumb.  I also didn't have time to sift the grain for a bran levain this time.  I'd love to try this again with rolls. Phil
An old west coast friend emailed me 2 days ago.  Her significant other was trying, without a lot of success, to make focaccia.  Did I have a recipe?  My last focaccia foray was probably in 2003 when I was a rank amateur home baker for a short time and  initially experimenting with Mr. Reinhart's BBA but years prior to the existence of TFL. Feeling my oats, I replied sure, allow me a few days to give it a go.  My first successful baguette dough and to this day still both the easiest as well as one of the most reliable has been the Anis Bouabsa baguette, first baked by me in late 2013.  I figured that this dough would be just dandy for a focaccia base.  And I believe that it is. With a 30 minute autolyse, bassinage, 300 French Folds, and three Letter Folds at 20, 40 and 60 minutes before retarding the dough for most of a calendar day, it couldn't be simpler. The Bouabsa formula uses a minuscule amount of IDY 0.16%, as the leavening agent, yet after a mere 1 hour bulk rise, the dough had already grown significantly.  Here it is, having just been pulled from retard. The dough is placed into a moderately well oiled pan stretched to conform to the pan, turned over to coat the other side with oil, and then dimpled. My selection of toppings: fresh thyme, fresh oregano, grated, pecorino-romano cheese, kosher salt, chopped kalamata olives and chopped roasted red pepper.  A final light slathering of oil over this. Baked at 450dF for 25 minutes, internal temp 210dF.  No need for a baking stone or steam.  A final drizzle of olive oil over the surface. The crumb was just a little more open than this picture shows.  Soft with a good chew, but the overall flavor would have benefited from both more salt and more grated cheese. All in all a successful venture considering the length of time since I last made this.  And now my friend has an email in her inbox with these pictures and my more detailed writeup for her beau. alan
This was my first attempt at making bread
This was my second attempt at making bread. I replaced 20% of the four with whole wheat. I had trouble getting the bread to split naturally during the bake.
I fed my starter, and, at peak, instead of discarding it, I saved it in a jar to use as a "levain" the next day. This was the resulting bake. Let the oven heat up at 500F for about 1 hour before throwing the bread in. Threw it in, baked it at 500F for 20 minutes, then lowered it to 450F and baked for another 20 minutes. No dutch oven, just on a pizza stone. Edges are a bit singed—not sure how to avoid this, other than turning the oven down. Happy with how it turned out! Didn't taste it because I gave it to our neighbor. :)
A basic sourdough, Rye, WW, Bread flour..  then bagelized.
I have 4 bins of "wheat" in the pantry. They are all fresh from the vendor, at a moisture content of ~11%. If I take samples of each, mill them, and mix each sample to the same hydration, the result will range from a "brick" (Kamut) to "soup" (spelt). If you are grinding your own flour, you need to account for the kind of wheat as you choose a hydration level.  Hard spring wheat and hard winter wheat have different hydration requirements.  If your bread making process uses  a particular hydration level,  then you need to stick with that kind, or blend of wheat so that you have a consistent flour that works at that level of hydration. Certainly, there are flours that are more or less interchangeable to a certain extent. Selecting, blending, and processing different kinds of wheat into a consistent product is what millers do. Consistency is why flour is more valuable than raw wheat berries, and why bakers buy flour from millers rather than wheat from farmers. If a recipe calls for a certain level of hydration, then is is assuming a certain kind or blend of wheat processed in a certain way into meal/flour. It is assuming consistency. If you not have that kind of flour/meal, then you need to adjust your recipe. If you are grinding your own meal/flour, then you need to recognize that wheat varies from cultivar to cultivar, by location grown, and from season to season. Then, you need to make adjustments to your milling or baking accordingly. Often this is as simple as adding a bit more flour or water to the dough. However, you need to recognize what dough of the right consistency looks like.  As much I disparage commercial flour, it is consistent. You can use it to learn what dough of the proper consistency looks and feels like. Mostly standard commercial flours work with standard recipes, and standard recipes work with the recommended commercial flours found at any supermarket. However, millers that supply real bakers, offer many different kinds of flour - and each different kind of flour has its use. And bakers use different kinds of flour for different kinds of products. The home miller can produce an infinite variety of flours, and the art is in putting each kind of flour to its best use.
My weekly bake this week, and I decided to go back to my favorite flour mix - 10% WW, 10% Semolina, and 5% Rye.  Of course, the WW % is actually higher since I feed my starter with WW flour, but you get the idea! :)  I tried very hard to be as gentle as possible with my stretching, folding, and I like the results thus far (still cooling, so haven't cut into them.)  In particular, I think these loaves seemed to hold their shape after being removed from the bannetons better than any loaves I have made before.  Here are the particulars, and some pics..... Formula 950g AP (GM) 80g WW 80g Semolina 40g Rye 240g levain 769g water (70%) 25g salt Total Dough - 2,184g Total Flour - 1,270g Total Water - 889g (70%) Timeline: 6:15a - Refresh starter 50:100:100 9:00a - Initial mix - flour, water, starter 9:30a - Pinch in salt, 30x slap/fold 10:00a - 20x slap/fold 10:30a - Stretch/fold, proof 1.5-2 hours @ 75F 12:00p - Divided and pre-shaped 12:15p - Final shape, into bannetons to proof @ 75F 1:30p - loaves into fridge 8:15p - pre-heat oven, loaves out of fridge 9:15 - loves into oven 9:35 - remove loaves from DO, bake in stone for 20 more 10:00 - remove loaves from oven to cool
The challenge for this weekend: Vollkornbrot from Jeffrey Hamelman’s Bread. This is one of my favorite recipes because it’s surprisingly low maintenance for rye bread, and the results are fantastic. I substituted BRM 7 grain cereal mix for rye chops, and it worked surprisingly well. The bread is a little less chewy than with rye chops, probably because the chopped grains in the mix are smaller. The crumb is more open than the last few times I’ve made this recipe, but I think I could still push the proofing a little farther. I was getting intimidated by the spreading pinholes. The worst part about making rye bread is waiting to slice into the loaf! The recipe calls for waiting 24-48 hours, but I only lasted "overnight," which was around 18 hours. I feel like a little kid on Christmas morning the day after I make a beautiful loaf of rye bread!
Alan posted delicious looking cinnamon raisin batards (http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/60371/maurizios-cinnamon-raisin-levain-baguettes) so I had to jump on the bandwagon too. I scaled up the original recipe from Maurizio to make three boules of my usual size which is usually around 1100 g of flour. I didn’t go as far as Maurizio to make my own raisins but I certainly thought about it! Due to it being a crazy week, I went with unsulfured Thompson raisins and soaked them in some bourbon overnight. His wholewheat flour was replaced by freshly milled Red Fife wheat done on the finest setting I could get on my Komo mill. I did not sift out the bran. It took a bit to find the Saigon cinnamon but one of the local health food stores had it. As well, I used my Kitchen Aid Pro Line mixer to mix and develop the gluten instead of using slaps and folds. When it was time to integrate the levain and the salt, I put the mixer on speed one for 1 or two minutes, then I put it on speed two for 9 minutes to develop the gluten. After the 9 minutes, I added the cinnamon and the raisins and mixed for another minute. The rest of the recipe was followed as per Maurizio’s instructions. This is the link to Maurizio’s original recipe: https://www.theperfectloaf.com/cinnamon-raisin-sourdough/ So here is my rescaled recipe: Makes 3 loaves Levain: 60 g trice refreshed sourdough starter 30 g strong bakers unbleached flour 30 g home milled red fife flour 60 g of filtered water Dough: 740 g strong bakers unbleached flour 300 g freshly milled red fife flour 830 g filtered water (divided into 730 g and 100 g) 22 g salt 180 g levain from above 220 g unsulfured Thompson raisins 22 g Bourbon 12 g Saigon cinnamon The night before: Raisins Soak the raisins in the bourbon and cover overnight. Be sure that your starter has been refreshed a couple of times already and give it one more feeding. You should have a total of 60 g of starter. Mill the required amounts of Red Fife berries on the finest setting possible. Reserve. Dough making day: Levain Early in the morning, add the water and flours for the Levain to the starter and let sit for 3 to 4 hours. Dough About an hour before the levain is ready, mix the dough flours and 730 g of the water together in a stand mixer on the lowest speed for a minute or two, and then let autolyse for an hour or so. Add the salt, part of the reserved water, and the levain and mix for a minute on the lowest speed. Then mix on the next speed up for 9 minutes. Then add the remaining water and the cinnamon. Let that mix for 30 seconds or so and then add the soaked raisins. Mix until the raisins are fairly well distributed. Cover the dough and let rise in a warm place. After 30 minutes, give it a set of stretches and folds until it feels quite firm. 30 minutes after that, do another set. Then let rise for another 3 or 4 hours. My dough temperature was 76 F when Maurizio called for 79F. I placed the dough in a warm spot (oven with the door cracked open and the lights on) to compensate for the cooler dough. I let it rise until I saw a number of large bubbles on top and the volume had expanded by 50%. This was an additional 4 hours and 15 minutes after the folds for this particular dough. So the total bulk was 5 hours and 15 minutes. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~775 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Place the dough seam side down in rice floured bannetons. Cover, then refrigerate overnight. The loaves spent 15.5 hours in the fridge. Baking Day: The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Watch that they don’t burn. Internal temperature should be 205F or more. The house smells amazing!
I got a copy of FWSY a few weeks ago and this was my first attempt at making a levain. My previous 3 efforts all used biga or poolish pre-ferment. I stuck to the recipe, but reduced the proof times somewhat given recommendations on this site and the temperature of my apartment (about 82 degrees). I also used about 75 degree water instead of the 90 degrees recommended since my home was warm. I also reduced the amount of instant yeast from the recommended 1/2 tsp to 1/4 tsp and increased the amount of whole wheat flour to 20% of the total flour used. I am very happy with how these turned out for a first attempt using my starter! I think the crumb is pretty good, but should I have expected it to be more open?
I am a sucker for fruit breads and decided to try this one. I would highly recommend this recipe, but I had a real issue getting the fruit to be well-dispersed. All of the fruit seem to be on the very top of the loaf which was frustrating. I didn't have fresh yeast so I used 1/2 tsp of instant and then 1/3 cup of fed sourdough starter. I put 5g of starter in the overnight pre-ferment and the rest when I mixed the dough the next day. I decided to make 2 smaller loaves. https://www.sustainweb.org/realbread/bake/real_christmas_bread/ Makes: 1 large or 2 small loaves For the pre-ferment175g white bread flour5g fresh yeast125g water, at about 25°C For the fruit and nut soaker100g crystallized ginger, chopped100g raisins or sultanas100g dried cranberries50g pitted dates, chopped50g dried figs, quartered100g almonds or Brazil nuts, chopped50g / 3⅓ tbsp rum, brandy or fruit juice For the dough220g white bread flour100g  butter, plus extra for greasing70g dark brown sugar100g lightly-beaten egg, (about 2 eggs) Mix the pre-ferment ingredients together thoroughly, cover and leave in the refrigerator for about 12 hours overnight. Meanwhile, mix the soaker ingredients together in a bowl, substituting similar fruits, nuts and liquid if you wish, according to taste, allergies or simply what you have to hand. Leave this mixture at room temperature for about 12 hours, stirring occasionally. Mix the dough ingredients into the pre-ferment and knead until the sticky mixture becomes a soft, smooth and glossy dough. Cover and leave at room temperature for 2–3 hours. At this point you can give it a fold and leave it for another hour or so, but this isn’t essential. Tip the dough out onto a lightly floured work surface and pat it into a rectangle about 20x25cm. Spread the fruit and nut soaker over almost all the surface. Roll the dough up carefully, turn it through 90 degrees and gently roll it up again, taking care not to force the fruit through the surface. The aim is even distribution, but it is better to leave the dough a bit lumpy than to work it so much that you end up with a mess. Grease the baking tin (or tins) with butter, shape the dough to fit and place it in the tin(s). Cover and leave to rise at room temperature for about 2 hours, or until the dough doesn’t spring back instantly when gently pressed. Heat the oven to 180°C/160°C fan/350°F/gas 4. Bake a large loaf for 45–60 minutes, smaller ones for about 30–40 minutes, until the top is a deep golden brown.
Hi TFLers! Long time no hear! I've been very busy adjusting to my new career that I seldom bake and post. I hope you still remember me. I made this simple flatbread for my birthday and I paired it with homemade charcuterie (sausages in particular). It feels like a very European thing to do but since no one drinks wine or alcohol in our household, we just washed it down freshly squeezed calamansi juice and hot chocolate. I do not know if I can call this foccacia or schicciata or pizza bianca so I just called it flat bread. It was inspired by the pizza dough made by a bakery in Rome that I watched in the pizza show. The dough is a simple one day sourdough made with AP flour, milk, salt, and a bit of sugar. The levain matured for 3 hours in the morning due to high temperatures then I made the main dough. I did 100 slap and folds for the initial gluten development. I gave the dough 3 sets of S&F's 1 hour apart during the bulk fermentation which took 4 hours. The dough was very soft and bubbly at the end of the bulk rise. I divided it into 2 and flattened it into rectangular flatbreads. I immediately cooked them on skillet for 3 minutes over medium heat then broiled at 250C for five minutes until golden brown and a little charred.I made a crisper thinner one and a softer thicker one. I brushed butter  in lieu of olive oil over half of the thinner one for more flavor albeit a softer crust.One can make a pocket even in the thin one with just a little force. Sliced it in half and filled it with my homemade dry cured sausages inspired  by the pizza bianca with mortadella and the schicciata filled with cold cuts as italian street foods.Filled with a sausage inspired by the flavors of Mortadella.The softer and thicker flatbread.Filled with a "Spanish Chorizo" inspired sausage.In this simple combination of meat and bread, without cheese, veggies, spreads, or sauces arose a flavor so sublime. Unlike how the sandwiches in those streets with a lot of meat, one doesn't need much here. The cured meats were so flavorful that less is more.The bread was soft on the inside, lightly chewy, substantial with a good bite and the crust was crispy with a charred aroma that adds to the experience, lightly bitter and plays well with the sweetness and that hint of tang of the crumb. The dough when raw has a tangy, buttery, cheesy aroma that intensified when it was baked. The texture really holds up to the meats. The sweetness and aroma or the milk was very pronounced and helped the crust get that lovely brown color. It really complimented the cured meats extremely well; they elevated each other.I will now go into detail with the stuff  with which I stuffed my flatbread.Yes, I added another thing to my arsenal/repertoire: charcuterie. The craft that mystified me for so long; I finally got the courage to try it even without proper equipment like a scale and accurate temperature and humidity controls. Dry cured sausage always carry the risk of botulism and listeria which are fatal so most people won't make it at home, why take the risk? I also only used salt and no nitrates because there is a higher risk of putting my health in danger for putting in too much nitrates than introducing bacteria to my body. But I'm relentless or stubborn maybe so I still went to do it. Again, I do not know if I will be called great or foolish for doing it.I'm not used to eating raw meat, even though this meats are cured I still consider them raw because they did not go under heat so I cooked them so it eliminates the risk of listeria and botulism where the toxin is quickly destroyed at temperatures over 80C for 10 minutes. I slow cooked these for an hour until caramelized. I really got confident when my first which was a cured meat from southern China became a huge success. Unlike western charcuterie, the one that I first made is very different through it's use of soy sauce and large amount of sugar. It also uses spices not commonly used in the west. I want to post it but I believe there will be a more fitting post for that one.Western ones often has garlic which increased the risk of botulism that kept me from trying to make them but I took the plunge finally and I was surprised with results. I really like it even though there was no trace of sweetness, and the garlic was very nice whether applied lightly of heavily.I originally planned to make hot sausages made with paprika but I decided to also make a more delicately flavored sausage like an old world salami or mortadella.This one was flavored with garlic, pepper, juniper and bay. Light on the garlic and I included whole peppercorns which added a nice flavor and texture to the finished sausage. The center did not dry that well due to to low of a humidity level. A "Spanish Chorizo" made with Spanish smoked paprika and garlic. I went heavy on the garlic and  I added cayenne to half to make a hot chorizo.What aroma and flavor! Really beats most "chorizos" I had before by a mile.The most decent chorizo that I can buy at the store.My homemade one.I learned a new skill this year! I plan to learn more. I am looking forward to learning how to smoke these meat beauties of mine. I think it will send them to another level!I thank God for another year of life and blessing! God bless you all! See you next time.
This was my first attempt at the FWSY 80% biga. As usual I made the dough using 25% whole wheat, I reduced the water temperature given the temperature of my apartment, and slightly reduced the proofing time. Given the lack of oven spring and tighter crumb structure, maybe I should reduce the proof time further? It tasted good, but definitely room for improvement. Is a good rule of thumbs for FWSY to end the bulk ferment when the dough is 2x the original volume?
I had not made a porridge bread in a little while, and I've been loving adding freshly ground barley to my bakes, so here we are.  I thought freshly ground Kamut would make a nice combination with the barley and I was not mistaken. I added some polenta I ground from the purple corn I recently purchased with some rolled oats to make a porridge and added some caramelized onions I had leftover in the main dough for good measure. I was very happy with the flavor profile on this one and the nice moist and tasty crumb as well. Please note, this formula made 3 loaves instead of my usual 2 since I gave a couple of them away to some former work colleagues. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the water called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the liquid is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the water and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.  Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, olive oil and salt and mix on low for 4minutes.   Add the onions and mix until incorporated.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 545 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. After 5 minute lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. For those of you interested, below are some photos from my gardens, which are finally taking shape.
After baking a lot with 50% Einkorn, I felt like I needed to get back to some dough that could hold a little more structure. Einkorn is VERY sticky and hard to work with, so this was sort of a break from that phase. I'm using AP, but contemplating switching to bread flour in the future for the white flour portion of my doughs. All in all, looks great, tastes better :)
Hello everyone, Yesterday I baked Barm bread form Daniel Lepard’s book. I did one single bread instead of two and I used T80 type of flour (the recipe called for white flour). The result is a tasty bread, full of flavor and I can say that it’s on the list of “to do again”.Below is the result. Thank you!
The lead photo is Auvergne Dark Rye from Leader's Local Breads.  While I won’t know until tomorrow how it looks inside, I really like the way the crust turned out.  I expect it will be worlds better than my disastrous first attempt with this bread a few years ago. The big difference is hydration.  Leader describes the dough as “soupy” but the water quantities (50g in the levain and 350g in the final dough) only work out to 53% hydration.  Something is obviously amiss.  My prior experience taught me that a soupy dough doesn’t work.  Some googling this morning brought recommendations for 475g to 550g of water in the final dough.  After considering it for a few minutes, I opted to use 500g of water.  The dough was definitely soft but nowhere near soupy. Leader doesn’t say anything about using bannetons for the final proof of this bread, which seems peculiar.  The dough is supposed to be very soft, so why not give it some support for the brief (20-30 minute) final proof?  Since I was already straying from his non-instructions, I figured I’d proof the boules seam-side down and let them fissure naturally, instead of scoring them.  Ah, yes, boules.  Plural.  Leader recommends a single large boule.  From my previous experience, I thought the smaller boules might bake out better than one great big boule, especially at the 500F oven temperature he recommends. Like I said, the appearance is encouraging.  Now to see if the crumb is as good as the crust. Since I was in the book, I also made Leader's Classic French Sourdough, including the seeded soaker.  For the soaker, I chose millet, steel cut oats, rolled barley, and cornmeal.  Given that combo, I also chose to use boiling water instead of room temperature water.  The thought of cracking a tooth on a millet seed or an oat fragment that hadn’t fully softened before baking even harder just didn’t appeal to me.  Other than adding a quarter teaspoon of ADY to the final dough, the rest of the process went as per instructions. The batards also turned out well, at least on the outside.  We might get into one of those with our dinner this evening. After some recent bakes that ranged from disappointing to frustrating, it feels really good to have two good ones in the same day. Paul Auvergne Dark Rye crumb: As good as hoped for.
I was so busy the past week that I wanted to make something quick to celebrate Father's Day. Instead of making bread, I decided to make cookies. This is just my second time to bake cookies; I am slowly exploring quick breads in my oven. It was quick but not that easy because of a few components which was inspired by the cookie principle of Monsieur Albouze. I made 3 giant single serving cookies, though roughly the same but with a variation for each. To French speakers out there, sorry if I made a mistake with the name; it just came to my mind while thinking of a name for this cookie, je suis désolé ! Mangoes are our favorite fruit and it's mango season now so I thought of flavors that would go well with mangoes and make it into cookie form.It starts with a rich, lightly salty, chewy cookie dough loaded with dried Philippine mangoes, roasted cashews and white chocolate disks. It was then stuffed with salted caramel in the middle then baked for 10 minutes at 180C. After 10 minutes, it was topped with more dried mangoes, white chocolate, homemade mango jam from slightly sour mangoes, and homemade caramelized cashews then baked again. After a further 10 minutes still at 180C, what you get is this fabulous cookie with intense but balanced flavors.Here are the variations:1. Exactly as the description above, stuffed with homemade soft and chewy salted caramel.2. Yema, a Filipino candy made from reduced condensed milk replaces the salted caramel as filling.3. Filled with Yema, topped with a slice of fresh mango in addition to the mango jam then finished with a sprinkling of dark chocolate. Our favorite!It was so fragrant from all the add-ins in addition the butter and sugar. The nutty aroma can even be smelt outside the house while they were baking and when they were cooling. The chewy dried mango, crunchy nuts, gooey chocolate, sticky caramel, chunky jam, and soft and smooth mangoes make for a party of textures in the mouth; and the balance of flavors from the caramel, salt, tang from the fresh mango, sweetness form the dried mangoes and chocolate and the nuttiness from the cashews. So enjoyable to eat!Look closely and you will see the caramel evenly distributed in the cookie.Sorry if this was out of focus, I was in a hurry to eat it.I had some beverages to pair with it but I found a glass of cold milk is the best! It really complements all of the flavors well. One more thing, how I wish I have filled all of them with my salted caramel, it really tastes way better with the mangoes than with the store bought candy (which I tried to see if making homemade is critical or just a waste of effort; if you can have an equal or better outcome using something store bought without effort, clearly the effort is worth it) and how I wish that it was the third variation that I have filled with the good stuff!Happy Father's Day!
For my second sourdough loaf I tried this awesome recipe: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/59838/stout-and-2year-old-white-cheddar-sourdough-oats I followed it pretty exactly, but added caramelized onions and 1/4 tsp instant yeast. I still want to work on getting a slightly better oven spring and more open crumb, but it tasted amazing! I'm still trying to figure out if I am over proofing, under proofing, or not developing the gluten enough.
My brother, Aaron, and I are both enthusiastic amateur rye bread bakers. Since we live on opposite sides of the country, we often exchange pictures and messages about our bread baking adventures, and occasionally we like to bake the same recipe to compare results. A few weeks ago, Aaron baked Frisian Black Bread from The Rye Baker twice in the same week. He couldn't get the dough to rise very far in the final proofing stage and ended up with dense loaves both times. I took a stab at the recipe this weekend, expecting similar results. Boy was I surprised! 20 minutes into the proofing time (listed as 30-45 min), the dough had risen to the top of the pan and was ready for baking. One of the strange quirks of this recipe is that the bread proofs in the oven and then is left in the oven while it pre-heats. The oven steamed up once I turned on the heat, but once the steam cleared away, I could see that the dough had exploded over the sides of the pan...whoops! After a full bake and hacking my poor franken-loaf out of the pan (I neglected to grease the top rim of the pan...and the outside?), I waited 24 hours to slice into the loaf only to discover a bread cavern! I'm not surprised given how vigorous the proofing and oven-spring was. Despite its visual flaws, the loaf is delicious—one of the tastiest rye breads I've made so far. Definitely a recipe I'll try again.
20190618_080711.jpg
 
 20190617_210352.jpg First time trying this flavor combo, pretty good. Could be better with another 15-20mins of proofing?? 60% whole grain( einkorn, spelt, rye and whole wheat all 15 %respectively) 37% Bread flour 3% wheat germ 1 head of roasted garlic(I put everything in the dough, olive oil and all) Thyme and crushed fennel seeds to taste I Tbsp Poppy(Will use more because I like the texture added) About 75% hydration more or less. I used all of of water, but I didn't count the moisture of the roasted garlic and oil 16 hour Cold bulk, out of the fridge, 30mins bench rest shaped cold and warm proof for about 80 minutes (but I feel like it needed another 15-20 min, or bench rest for that much longer to bring the dough up to room temp before shaping. )It was a cold day and I felt like the dough was colder than it normally should when I did the final shaping. Maybe that explains why only the center of the loaf seemed to be a tad bit under proofed and the other sections are fine. Like this one 20190618_092619.jpg Or am I totally paranoid? What do you think?
I've been baking bad for just over a year now. Sourdough obsession came, peaked and then subsided for a few months whilst travelling. Its back with a vengeance as is my bread! I came home to a very sorry looking starter. Abandoned for two months it was grey and stinky and had black water covering it. So, I just poured it off, mixed it all together, took a tablespoon and fed it. After a few days feeding it bounced right back. Hello bubbles and sweet fruity aromas. Then I thought I try a new method and found Joshua  Weissman. A little annoying to listen too ( Sorry Joshua)  but easy to follow baking schedule and the best results Ive had in a year. If you haven't already found him here's a link to his website he's on insta and youtube too. https://slimpalate.com/proper-homemade-bread/ My bread came out of the banneton without sticking. A first. Then it held its shape whilst I gave it the oh so satisfactory light bakers slashes. Also a first. It ballooned in it's glass Dutch oven in record time, growing ears as I watched! It came out singing. Crackling and popping and with lovely blistery bubbles in the crust. Im calling this a personal best. It was also delicious.
A few months after Alan (aka alfanso) posted his bake of the Scott McGee ciabatta, I finally got around to baking the bread.  The result was pleasing, with one loaf consumed at home by my wife and me and the other given away to a neighbor. I used my KitchenAid Artisan mixer and followed Alan's directions for speed levels, but I have never done French Folds and decided not to make this my first venture into that technique.  Instead, I worked the shaggy dough in the mixing bowl by some hearty hand pulling (think of what Trevor J. Wilson does in his mixing bowls) and observed some nice gluten development already.  The bassinage was interesting.  I opted to combine the water, olive oil, and salt in a Pyrex measuring cup for easy pouring.  The shaggy dough was a little stiff, but when I added a bit of the mixture and the dough loosened, the speed of the mixer let me know to wait until that dose was absorbed.  I repeated that a few times, gradually incorporating the bassinage elements until upping the mixer speed to 6 and then 8. The dough did not climb the hook very much, and I found that the pauses for scraping down the sides of the bowl seemed to give the dough a chance to recover.  By the end, with the dough slapping around on the 8 speed, the smooth and shiny texture I had been hoping to see was present.  As Alan predicted, the mixer generates some heat in the dough, and my final dough temperature was 83dF.  My water temperatures were 71dF for the initial mix and 65dF for the bassinage, but clearly these could be lowered.  On the other hand, aside from a slightly faster bulk fermentation and final proofing, I do not think that the 83dF made much of a difference from what something like 77dF might have produced. This is an amazingly billowy dough, but with a lot of strength.  I chose to shape the dough by first dividing the mass into two portions and then flattening each portion into a rectangle and doing a letter fold on each before placing them onto a couche for proofing.  They puffed a bit, but when placed into the oven, they ballooned. I use lava stones in pie pans for steaming, but I also spray ciabatta before it goes into the oven.  After thirteen minutes I opened the oven door and allowed the steam to escape.  Thereafter I kept an eye on the loaves, which started to darken.  A check of the internal temperatures showed 209dF after another dozen minutes, and ultimately I removed the loaves after a total of thirty-two minutes of baking. Here are the loaves on the cooling rack. The crumb has a very pillow-like softness with an assortment of large, small, and medium holes.  The crust is nice and chewy (for me an important characteristic of ciabatta). These loaves became a deeper darker brown than any other ciabatta that I have baked, and for me that was a big plus.  It is likely that I could leave the loaves in longer the next time and see how dark they can be.  There was no burning on the bottom. This is a fun recipe, and the dough has a feel of its own.  Thanks to Alan for posting his bake and giving me another option for ciabatta. Happy Baking. Ted
I've always wanted to bake hoagie rolls but for some reason was too intimated to try. Maybe because these involve shaping multiple little loaves at once? I don't know but I'm hooked! These were fun to make and they came out great! These are also a great way to practice shaping, as you have to do so many at once. I baked 12 loaves in al. Thinking of making sourdough rolls next, topped with sesame seeds! After mixing the dough, I divided and shaped into balls then I flatted and rolled each piece after resting Here are the rolls after shaping and then after rising and scoring What is it about making bread that is so therapeutic? I sprayed rolls and oven with water to create just a bit of steam.
This is a 66% rye bread made with fresh milled rye sifted so it's close to a medium grind rye flour.  I added some fresh milled spelt as well which really compliments the rye.  I had some left-over cheese grits from my wife's breakfast the other day so into the mix it went along with some mashed potatoes which were roughly mashed. This was a very sticky dough as the moisture from the grits and potatoes added a lot of extra water content.  The 58% hydration listed in the formula does not include the water from the potatoes and grits so in reality it is much higher.  If you don't feel comfortable with such a sticky dough you can adjust the water as needed. Also, keep in mind if you use store bought flour it may not be as thirsty as the fresh milled I used. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. This bread came out fantastic.  The crumb was nice and moist and open just enough to make a perfect pastrami sandwich with some melted cheese and Thousand Island dressing. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, grits, potatoes, olive oil, and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Below are some more photos from my gardens.  The summer flowers are starting to bloom now.  Enjoy!
Recently been corresponding with Katy 'Bakingbad' and the subject of Pate Fermentee was explored especially as a possible way of getting a stronger sour into S/D. As most of you are aware its a French term for adding old dough to a new mix.  It got me thinking about something i spotted years ago in a local West Australian bakery when i was chatting to the owner during his weighing up for his production. I recognised the different things that he was scooping up from under the counter bins  except one so took a closer look, he smiled and said its "bread crumbs". Apparently its used in a number of his Italian style breads claims it adds flavour, texture colour and value. The bread is day old bread that is processed into crumbs that he also sells, the bread goes through a hammer mill and the crumbs spread out on shallow trays that go into the cooling ovens at the end of the day to dehydrate. Anyway i have never tried this myself but decided now was the time, i had a quarter of a potato rosemarie and black sesame loaf left from a previous bake so put that to good use and turned it into crumbs (the donor loaf which was very good too but qualified as a 2 day old loaf) I quickly formulated a dough that would use bread crumbs at 10% and a total dough weight of 750g to fit into the sandwhich loaf tin i have, i also was using fresh compressed yeast. The dough mixed up well by hand on the bench. It was given a bulk proof   knocked back  rested for 15 minutes shaped placed in the tin. i slid the lid on whilst it proved  checking its progress along the way  i decided to bake without the lid on  as i've not done this dough before and i would be able to get a better look at its spring . So there we have it  a nice fine soft crumb that is often sought for sandwich breads, i think that the lovely aroma from the potato / rosemarie has carried through  in this, and its made wonderful thin cut toast. you can still see the odd black sesame seed from the original loaf. Regards Yozza
I loved David’s San Francisco recipe and decided to add some seeds to it and change the flour combo. I got the inspiration for the seed mixture from a guy named Josh (JoshFox Bread) that I follow on Facebook. He has a micro bakery thing happening similar to what I do but on a larger scale. His breads always look so delectable! So between David’s recipe/method and Josh’s combo of seeds, I hope I have a winner! Levain: 63 g starter 63 g water 110 g unbleached flour 15 g freshly milled Rye flour Dough: 668 g strong bakers unbleached flour 116 g freshly milled Durum flour 116 g freshly milled Spelt flour 96 g freshly milled Rye flour 800 g filtered water 23 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g plain whole milk yogurt Add-ins: 40 g toasted sesame seeds 40 g toasted sunflower seeds 40 g toasted flax seeds 40 g toasted millet 40 g toasted poppy seeds A few days before: Get your starter up to speed by feeding it two or three times. I fed mine 3 times with rye and unbleached flour. Two nights before: Mix the starter with the water and then add the flours. Let ferment at room temperature (70 F or so) for 12 hours. Refrigerate until the morning of making the dough. For me this was about 24 hours. The night before: Mill and measure out your flours and set aside covered. Toast all of the add-ins in a dry frying pan. Cover and reserve. Dough making day: Remove the levain from the fridge to warm up to room temperature. Mix the flours and the water in a stand mixer and mix on low for one or two minutes until you have a shaggy dough and no dry flour. Let autolyse for a couple of hours. Add the salt, the yogurt and the starter in chunks. Mix on low for 1 minute to mix the ingredients and then mix on the next speed up for 9 minutes to develop the gluten. Add the toasted seeds gradually and mix for a minute or two to distribute the seeds throughout the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled bowl and cover. Place in a warm spot (82 F-My warm spot is my oven with the lights on and the door cracked open) and let ferment for 3 and a half hours with two sets of stretches and folds at 50 and 100 minutes. My dough rose about 30% by the end of bulk fermentation. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~760g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Place the dough seam side down in rice floured bannetons. Cover and roof in a warm spot until dough has risen 50%. When I made this recipe the last time, the dough had risen 50% in two hours but this time, it was ready after only one. 🤗 Then refrigerate for at least 12 hours. This particular dough was retarded for 17 and a half hours. Baking Day: The next morning, heat the oven to 475 F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough, seam side up, inside. I was surprised at how light the loaves felt and hoped that they weren’t overproofed! 😳 Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. I think I caught them just in time. I have ears on most of them so happy about that!
I have been experimenting with different ways to use my home oven for pizza.  Tonight's came out really good.  I used a baking steel about 6 inches below the top of the oven, close to the middle rack.  I used 550 F setting and also used the convection setting which often adds another 25 or so equivalent heat.  I preheated the oven for one hour. I used my sourdough culture which I built up 3 times at 100% hydration followed by making the dough and a further two days in the refrigerator.  I used a food processor running and pulsing for 90 seconds.  King Arthur 12.7% Special Patent Flour (785gr or 96%)  I also used 33 grams or 4% of 100% whole wheat flour for the remaining).  Thus total flour of 816 gr, 3% salt, 100gr of starter, 500Gr spring water (62% hydration).  I added two tbs of extra virgin olive oil and 1 tbs of malt powder I made from sprouted wheat.  Basil on the whole pie with sausage on half. I baked the pie for two minutes, then turned the pizza 180 degrees around and cooked for another three minutes.  The bottom crust was nice and crisp due to the baking steel, far better then I ever got with when using a stone (although stone works well overall).   I am very pleased with the result.  Next time I may cut the dough size back 10%. Each ball was 440 grams or .97 lbs each, 410gr may be better for this NY style pie.  And perhaps 10% whole wheat and 90% white.  Or as my sweetheart Liz said, it was fine the way it was!  The never ending quest for perfection!! :-)
The tastiest sourdough I have ever baked. And also the most aromatic. It is one of those recipes that you bake in an enamel cast iron casserole dish and it just did not rise as much as I hoped. It had to prove in the fridge for two hours before being tipped into the hot pot, but I went swimming and it spent at least double that time in the fridge. I am not sure it that may have affected the rise. It is the best tasting bread without a doubt. The mix of applesauce, ground almonds and orange is a great flavour combination. The recipe also included raisins, but I felt it did not quite feel right with the other ingredients so I gave it a miss.  Orange flower water is very strong in terms of its perfume, so I settled for a half teaspoon and zested two oranges instead.  I think it turned out perfectly in terms of taste. I will make this one again and again. The original recipe https://breadtopia.com/sourdough-apple-almond-raisin-bread/
I already posted these creations to the C.B.  I feel these first specialty pizza pies of mine desire a blog entry also. This morning I whipped up a batch of my IDY pizza dough by hand, scaled for two 12- inch pies (324 Grams Ea.) The plan is for a seven-hour room temperature ferment. For these special Community bake pies, I am going way off the reservation in regards to toppings. My wife requested chicken as her topping, her pie will be chicken cordon blue pizza. My pie is going to be Italian eggplant Parmigiano pizza. Smile... This is exciting! Preparation complete, oven pre-heating. All systems go All the ingredients for both the chicken and eggplant pies ready and waiting. We are on schedule for a 4:30 PM bake. T minus 80 Minutes.  Smile... First out of the oven, chicken cordon bleu. Next up on the menu, Eggplant parmigiano pizza pie. Thanks for visiting. My next community pie bake will be a sourdough skin, rustic pie from the country of my heritage, (Malta) Look for it in the C.B. thread! As promised, I submit for your approval: A  rustic flat bread pizza, from the island of Gozo Maltese/Gozitan Ftira/ Ftira Għawdxija. The toppings: Olive oil, vine ripened tomato, anchovies, raw shallot rings, capers, sauteed shallots with shiitake mushrooms, garlic. and topped off with thinly sliced red potatoes. This my friends is indeed a culinary treat! The recipe is in the photos. I converted the crust (base) from a commercial yeast formula to sourdough, additionally I added my obligatory whole grains. As you can see this formula called for a very low hydration dough, which worked very well for this application.
I just tried my first recipe from Sourdough by Sarah Owens. I used the Sweet Potato Levain recipe and doubled it, but substituted canned pumpkin for sweet potato. The recipe used 300g leaven, 680g water, 360g pumpkin puree, 20g molasses, 900g bread flour, 240g whole wheat flour, 60g rye, and 24g sea salt. At 10pm the night before the bake I built the levain. At 6am the following morning I mixed the water, pumpkin, flours, and water with the starter and allowed to autolyse for 30 minutes. I then sprinkled salt on top and then did 70 slap and folds. I let rest for 30 minutes and then did 40 slap and folds. I then did 3 stretch and folds. I didn't touch it during the last hour of bulk ferment. The dough had almost doubled after 3.5 hours. I pre-shaped and then shaped the dough and put in the fridge for an 8-hour retarded  fermentation. I baked for 22 minutes with lid on and 17 minutes with lid off. I think I could have let the crust brown a bit more, but was worried about it catching because of the sugar in the dough. Tastes good, but a bit disappointed in the crumb. Decent oven spring.
I copied this recipe from Danni . Following her comments I increased the amount of cornmeal, but otherwise I pretty much followed exactly. My apartment was hot and humid (NYC summers!) so I reduced I lot of the fermentation times. at 7:30am I poured 220g of boiling water on 120g of coarse cornmeal and at the same time I built my levain of 33g starter, 33g rye, 66g whole wheat, and 66g cold water (my apartment was about 82 degrees). At noon I did an autolyse of all of the cornmeal soaker (about 340g) with 300g whole wheat and 700g bread flour and 560g water. This sat for 1 hour. Given how hot my apartment was, at 12:30 (5 hours later) I mixed the dough adding the levain and 22g of salt. I did 70 slap and folds, waited 30 minutes, and did 40 slap and folds during which I incorporated the 150g of sunflower and pumpkin seeds. I then transferred the dough to a container and did 3 stretch and folds over the next 1.5 hours. The bulk ferment was about 4.5 hours and the dough rose maybe 30-40%. I then pre-shaped the loaves and did a final shape 10 minutes later. Given how hot my apartment was, I was nervous about over-proofing. I then refrigerated the shaped dough for about 15 hours and baked right out of the fridge for 25 minutes covered and 20 minutes uncovered. This is by far the best oven spring I've ever had. I was worried because the loaves hadn't risen much during the fermentation process. I am so excited to cut it open!
After years of experimentation, I think I'm finally starting to understand how to get the results I'm looking for. Both of these doughs were prepared similarly: Autolyse this mix with 582g water for about 3 hours. Hand mix in 150g mature levain (dome not yet deflated) and then do French folds on countertop. Let hang out for 45 minutes. Add 18g salt and do French folds. Let hang out for 30 minutes. Do 4-stretch and fold in bowl. For every hour for the next 3 hours, do stretch and fold in bowl. About 90 minutes after the last S&F, shape and put into the fridge and retard anywhere between 12 and 20 hours. Take out next day, slash, and bake on pizza stone for 20 minutes at 485F, then lower to 450 and bake for another 20 minutes. Interesting how these two doughs had different blooms given that they were the same dough. The height of the dough that appeared to have less of a bloom on the first photo actually had a better spring, at nearly 4.5 inches. I'm still working on shaping on the ends of the batard. They're always sloped this way. I'm not sure how to fix it, other than more tension. Super happy with my open crumb, but not too open as to let butter slip through every nook and cranny.
Finally got the recipe to work on my fourth try and reading some of the basic advice found on the forums. Reduced the hydration from 85 to 75 percent and did a colder set of rises at 73 degrees. Very pleased to have gotten two good loaves, after all this work and decided to make my first post.
According to the the Larousse Book of Bread. A mixture of white bread and rye flour, liquid levain (100% hydration rye sourdough starter) and dry yeast. I was quite pleased with the looks and the bread has a very pleasant taste. The rye component is clearly present but not overwhelming and a fine crust.
I needed to make some rolls for burgers and sandwiches and if you know me by now, adding cheese was a must :).  The main flour was Kamut with some KAF bread flour thrown in for good measure.  The eggs really added some nice moisture and flavor and the smoked Gouda cheese I used put them over the top.  Of course if you don't like smoked cheese (like my wife who hates it), use a more mild cheese. I used chunks of cheese which unfortunately when I added them in to the dough did not distribute evenly so I ended up with some rolls with almost no cheese and some with the perfect amount.  It probably would have been better to add shredded cheese or to add the chunks when forming the rolls.  Oh well, I guess next time. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, maple syrup, egg yolks, and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Now add the cheese or wait until you form the dough per my comments above. You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 1.5 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours. When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape into rolls. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 475 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. If desired, use an egg wash about 15 minutes before you are ready to bake them and sprinkle toppings of your choice.  I used garlic sesame seeds, everything bagel topping and smoked sesame seeds. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 445 degrees.  Bake for 15-25 minutes until the rolls are nice and brown and the internal temperature is 200 degrees. Take the rolls out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before eating. Below are some more photos from my gardens.  The summer flowers are starting to bloom now.  Enjoy!
I had quite a few people asking me for a redo so here it is. Minor changes were using only 50g of additional water, doubling the amount of bourbon, mixing the cinnamon with the raisins before adding to the dough and bulking for only 4 hours as the dough temp was quite a bit higher with this batch. Here is my prior recipe: Once again I got nice oven spring. Hopefully the crumb is as nice as last time.
A better approach that seems less effort is a 4-hour long Autolyse  of fresh ground wheat berries at 90% hydration, then add ~10%  sourdough starter, a  4 hour bulk ferment including several stretch and folds with 2% salt added at the next to last stretch and fold,  a 12-hour retard, then form the loaves, and a final rise in baskets of about 3 or 4 hours.  Bake at 450F convection on a pizza stone. Working here in California at mostly room temperature, the whole thing took about 20 hours, noting that autolyse began while the flour was still warm from grinding - e.g., 115F, but the starter came straight our of the fridge. The wheat was Red Winter Wheat, that had not been tempered, so the dough not as wet as it sounds, and was easy to work.  In fact, I added another 15 ml of water as I folded in the salt. This is the best 100% whole wheat bread I have ever baked, so this is a procedure that I intend to repeat over and over, and someday perfect.
Hi, I took inspiration from this fig and anise levain, but then swapped out the mix-ins and followed my own process: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/30486/comfort-food-%E2%80%93-fig-anise-levain-meringues Levain 50g starter 58g water 100g flour (50/50 whole wheat and bread) Final dough 208g levain 787g bread flour 138g whole wheat flour 375g Mix of dried cranberry/golden raisin, apricot/walnut 15g fennel 712g water 50g schnapps used to soak dried fruit 20g sea salt Method 1. Cut up fruit and soak in 50g of peach schnapps. Toast the walnuts. 2. Mix levain and let ferment for 4 hours at 85 degrees 3. Mix flour and water and let autolyse over the same 4 hour period 4. Use pincer method to combine the flour, salt, and levain 5. Do 70 slap and folds, wait 30 minutes and do 40 slap and folds (incorporating fruit and nuts at this point), wait 30 minutes and do 10 slap and fold. Now do 3 sets of stretch and fold over the next 1.5 hours. Total bulk fermentation of 4 hours. 6. Preshape, wait 20 minutes and did final shaping and put in fridge overnight (7 hours) 7. 1 hour fermentation on counter in the AM 8. 25 minute bake at 450 degrees followed by 15 minutes without steam
Hi, I followed Hotbake's lovely recipe with my own process and I also increased some of the amounts to get a larger loaf (in the future I'll probably make the loaf even bigger) http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/60618/chai-and-double-chocolate-chip-sourdough 340g bread flour 30g whole wheat 20g rye 325g chai concentrate 60g honey 60g salt 80g starter Method 1. Mixed 26g starter/26g water/13g bread flour/13g whole wheat flour to make levain and let it sit for 4 hours at 85 degrees 2. Make the Chai concentrate - 300g milk - 100g water - 1 cinnamon stick -1 tbsp ground ginger - 3 slices fresh ginger -3 cardamom pods -1 tsp vanilla -2 English breakfast tea bags -20g sugar, 1/8 tsp salt, black pepper Put everything but the teabags together and bring to a simmer, turn off heat, add teabags and 60g honey, and cover for 1 hour 3. Autolyse the flour and chai concentrate for about 3 hours 4. Do 70 slap and folds, wait 30 minutes and do 40 slap and folds (incorporating chocolate chips and 1 tea bag), wait 30 minutes and do 10 slap and fold. Now do 3 sets of stretch and fold over the next 1.5 hours. Total bulk fermentation of 4 hours. 5. Preshape, wait 20 minutes and did final shaping and put in fridge overnight (7 hours) 6. 1 hour fermentation on counter in the AM 7. 25 minutes at 450 degrees with lid on (on parchment paper on cornmeal as per the recommendation) followed by 20 minutes without lid and with dutch oven on a baking sheet
I’ve been making this bread every  weekend since mid-April with the goal of entering it in the county fair, which has a sourdough division this year. The theme of the fair this year is “Over the Moon”, hence the stencil. I made 3 batches of 2 loaves each so I’d have plenty to choose from, this one looked the nicest. The bake was really darker than what the lead photo shows, and the crust was nicely blistered. I was surprised that the judges only cut a small triangle from each entry, it seems hard to judge the crumb from that. I suspect the crumb of the loaf I submitted wasn’t nearly as open as I hoped, of course I don’t know because I couldn’t cut that one, but this loaf is from my first of the 3 batches: I wish I was able to get that crumb regularly. Unfortunately I’m still quite uneven,  I don’t know whether it’s variables in my shaping or proofing. I’ll keep experimenting and hopefully next year try it again. Here’s my recipe for Multigrain Sourdough with Cracked Rye and Barley: Soaker (night before): 100 g. freshly cracked rye 100 g. freshly cracked barley 4 g. salt 400 g. boiling water. Leave on counter overnight. for the dough: 700 g. Artisan Baker’s Plus (Central Milling) 149 g. freshly ground Red Fife wheat, #40 sifted 26 g. freshly ground rye, #40 sifted 465 g. Water 250 g. levain, 3-stage build from NMNF starter, partly bran fed, 100% hydration. Many thanks to dabrownman for the NMNF scheme! 20 g. salt I’ve been finding it easiest to mix the soaker with the water first because the soaker is so firm and lumpy, then add the flours and mix until shaggy, then autolyse for 90 minutes before adding salt and levain and mixing for 6 minutes (Ankarsrum) , rest 15, mix 3 more , rest 15, another 3 minutes and then transfer to my bulk container where I did 5 sets of stretch-and-folds on 30 minute intervals. I judged the dough was ready to divide after about 3and a half hours total bulk ferment at 82df. Preshape, rest 30 minutes, and shape (stitching). The loaf that went to the fair got 20 minutes proofing at 82df, then 15 hours in the fridge and into a hot Dutch oven with only enough delay to score and stencil. The loaf with the nice crumb got 1 hour warm proof and 30 minutes in the fridge while the oven warmed up to 500. I’m very happy with the texture and flavor of this recipe but after a couple of months with it I think I’ll make some white bread next. ;-) Tom
Husband always bakes the cookies in the family and I’m the bread baker. But he has begged for baggies forever! So I looked up some saved formulas and we picked an easy one. Well easy I so far as baguettes can be easy! These are hybrid . Use a tiny amount of starter to make a preferment and then only a 1/4 tsp ADY the next day. I directed and he manipulated the dough. We opted for “ rustic” shaping since I noted that other TFLers had done so . One baggie was retarded a couple hours and baked same day. Two were bulk retarded and baked today. I don’t like bulk retard because you lose all that lovely expansion in the shaping and there is only so much ooomph in the yeasts. The shaping and baking were easy.  One hour 500 preheat with baking steel and transfer dough  on parchment with a sheet pan . Steam was easy just boiling water poured into a hot pan beneath the steel left for 10 min. These loaves sang their little hearts out when they came out of the oven. The crust is shatteringly crisp. The holes are respectable for a first ever baggie baker😊. Since we grew up in New Orleans making a ham and cheese po boy was mandatory. Delicious! Wish we had had some fried Gulf shrimp! These are way better than anything we’ve had in recent memory in New Orleans and not anywhere as wondrous as some we had in tiny village boulangerie in France a few years ago. There are three more loaves shaped and retarding for a bake tomorrow. Will see how that goes. Husband is happy so I’m happy.
I have not been posting too much as might get too repetitive for your folks and also have been visiting family in Germany... So being back nurtured that starter and tried to bake with a different Shipton Mill Organic Semolina Durum flour as the Caputo Semola Rimicinata is not easy to get hold off where I live...and I looooove that flour.... It is very fine but the glutenins seem to be 'weaker' than the Caputo and I use less water...less of an autolyse and less of slap and folds to protect the gluten that I want to develop... This was just using what I had so about 15% Shipton Mill Semolina, 15% WW and 10% Spelt and the rest Strong white Organic Marriages.. at 76% hydration with a 100% hydration young starter using half WW and half White... This loaf was trying a more sideways score to get a different ear rather than my usual down the middle score...and I forgot to turn the Rofco down which would have resulted in overglazed loaves but thankfully realized after 2 min without too much damage done......but I did this a lot in my early Rofco days without realizing...too much steam can also have that effect I noticed.... Then my weekly bake of five with a tiny test loaf on top....You can also spot the yellow tinge of the Semolina and white and black sesame seeds on the top......love that combination of sesame seeds and durum. A shame that the black sesame seeds are so expensive in the UK. A bit of gold dust! ha. ha.... I tend to make a mini test loaf as all the other ones go to friends! I also still experiment what my favourite banneton size is....no conclusion yet...and to be continued....so always a bit of a menagerie...
I have not made pretzel rolls in a while and wanted to try a new version.  I added some fresh milled purple corn flour, and rye flour along with some maple syrup to add a little sweetness.  Beer certainly goes well with pretzels so adding it to the dough was a no-brainer. They came out very nice and you can really taste the beer flavor.  They are a little more dense than ones made with only white flour but certainly are tasty! Download BreadStorm Files here. Caution:  When using the Lye make sure you wear gloves, long sleeves and protective eye gear. Also, never add Lye to hot water or it will bubble over and probably burn you. For Lye Bath (3.5% Solution 2 Liters (1836 grams) of Cold water 70 grams Sodium Hydroxide Crystals Make the Levain Add your seed starter to the indicated amount of flour and water and mix until incorporated.  Cover and let sit out at room temperature of in your proofer until nice and bubbly around 6-10 hours depending on your temperature.  Use immediately or refrigerate for a few days until ready to mix the main dough. Procedure Add the diastatic malt powder to the beer and stir.  Add the flours in your mixing bowl and slowly add the beer mixture.  Mix for about 1 minute until combined.  Cut your starter in pieces and lay on top of the flour mixture and cover and let rest for 30 minutes to 1 hour so the flour can absorb the liquid. Next add the salt and maple syrup and mix for 6 minutes on low.    Place the dough in a slightly oiled bowl and do a couple of stretch and folds.  Cover the bowl and let it rest for 10-15 minutes.  Do another stretch and fold in the bowl and let it rest another 10-15 minutes.  Do another stretch and fold and let the dough sit out in the covered bowl for another 1.5 hours.  Place the dough in the refrigerator until ready to bake the next day. When ready to bake take the dough out and leave it covered in your bowl for 1 - 1.5 hours.  Next divide the dough into pieces that are 110 grams each or 155 grams for larger rolls .  Shape as rolls and place on a baking sheet and cover with either a moist towel or plastic wrap sprayed with cooking spray.  Let it rest for around 60 minutes to about 1/2 proof. While the rolls are proofing, fill a large stock pot with 2 liters of cold water.  Measure out the Lye and slowly add it to the cold water.  (DO NOT EVER ADD LYE TO HOT WATER).  Cover the pot and bring it to a rolling boil and then shut off the heat. Pre-heat your oven to 435 degrees.  When the rolls are proofed sufficiently, prepare to dip them for about 15 seconds in the lye bath upside down.  Let them drain on a bakers rack over a cookie tray covered with a towel or parchment paper.  After draining for a minute you can transfer them to a cookie/baking sheet that has been sprayed with cooking spray.  You want to use a stainless steel cooking sheet as aluminum may react with the lye and peel.  Note: do not ever use parchment paper as the rolls will get stuck to the bottom.  I know this from experience and I had to cut off the bottoms of half the rolls I made.  I actually use my Silpat non-stick sheets which work like a charm. When ready to bake, score each roll with an "X" on the middle and sprinkle with pretzel salt and your topping of choice (I used sesame seeds and cheese and some poppy seeds).  Make sure you use pretzel salt if you want authentic rolls. Bake for about 15-20 minutes until they are golden brown and register about 200 F in the middle.  Let them cool on a bakers rack until you can't wait any longer! Note: you cannot store these in a plastic bag or covered really otherwise the salt will react with the moisture in the air and you will end up with soggy tops.  I place them in a paper bag and leave it open so the air circulates. Enjoy! Some more photos from the gardens this week.
Got my weekly bake done today, and all went smoothly.  The only real adjustment to my usual process was due to an early dinner that we had scheduled to celebrate our youngest daughter's birthday with her grandparents.  Instead of my usual 1.5 hour final proof at RT (before retarding for a few hours), I only let it proof at RT for .5 hours, then into the fridge for about 6 hours.  Everything came out well (no crumb shot yet, but I expect it will look the same as usual, perhaps a little tighter based on the dough feel, and how it looked out of the fridge.) 950g AP flour (Gold Medal) 80g WW flour (KA) 80g Semolina (BRM) 40g Dark Rye (BRM) 760g Water 250g active starter (100% hydration) 26g salt The other minor change to my process was to try to replicate Kat's perfectly vertical ear from her blog post earlier today (HERE).  I dropped my scoring further down on the side of the loaf, whereas my usual scoring is just a bit to the side of the center line.  On the first loaf, I think I was a bit hesitant with my slash, and this resulted in a bit of a wavy ear: I approached the second one with a bit more confidence, slashing in one motion (I also move the slash location up just a bit....more toward center), and I got much closer to a "soldier" ear (standing at attention): Other than that, I got good spring, nice color, and some good blistering, too. I'll keep working on this scoring technique, as I find it somewhat visually appealing.  Thanks for the inspiration, Kat! :) Rich
I have quite a stock of Spelt and Kamut berries and need to use some of them up. While searching, I found this impromptu recipe that I made over the winter for my daughter so I scaled it for three loaves and tweaked the method. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Soaker: 65 g Spelt flakes 65 g Kamut flakes 65 g Bulgur 65 g honey 260 g boiling water Levain: 60 g trice refreshed sourdough starter 30 g strong bakers unbleached flour 30 g home milled rye flour 60 g of filtered water Dough: 720 g strong bakers unbleached flour 155 g freshly milled Spelt flour 155 g freshly milled Kamut flour 716 g filtered water 23 g salt 30 g plain yogurt 180 g levain from above The night before: Combine the ingredients for the soaker and cover overnight. Mill the individual amounts of Spelt, Kamut and Rye berries on the finest setting possible. Reserve separately. Be sure that your starter has been refreshed a couple of times already and give it one more feeding. In the morning, you need a total of 60 g of starter. Dough making day: Levain Early in the morning, add the water and flours for the Levain to the starter and let sit for 4 hours. Dough About an hour or more before the levain is ready, mix the dough flours and the water together in a stand mixer on the lowest speed for a minute or two, and then let autolyse for an hour or so. Add the salt, the yogurt, and the levain and mix for a minute on the lowest speed. Then mix on the next speed up for 9 minutes. Then add the soaker. Mix until the soaker is well distributed. Cover the dough and let rise in a warm place. My dough temp was 77F. After 30 minutes, give it a set of stretches and folds until it feels quite firm.  Repeat in 30 minutes. 45 minutes after that, do another set. Then let rise until total bulk fermentation equals 4 hours. By then, I see some large bubbles on the top and the volume has expanded by about 50-60%. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~835 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Note that I had to move pretty fast as the dough started to get sticky the more I touched it. Place the dough seam side down in rice floured bannetons. Cover, then refrigerate overnight. Baking Day: The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205F or more. For fun, after the dough was mixed I figured out the hydration including all ingredients (counted in Bulgur and flakes as part of the flour) except for the salt, allowing 80% water for the yogurt and 10 % water for the honey, and came up with 83.4% hydration! 😳No wonder it felt borderline sticky when I was shaping! On another note, I have been using cooking spray to oil my Cambro tubs for the autolyse and bulk fermentation. It really makes a difference for me when I am moving dough in and out of tubs to put into the mixer. I am not fighting to get every little bit out and makes clean up a breeze. Wish I had thought of this years ago!
Hi all, The app I created is a REVOLUTION to bake your bread at home and change your life with a wonderful & simple way of eating healthy and tasty food every day. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tost.gilles.frenchbreadrecipemaker Download it, design and nake your dream bread. Visit our WEBSITE https://www.tostcorp.com/french-bread-secrets View our YouTube demo https://youtu.be/jdsG2hybHy0 Enjoy baking! Gilles.
Bread lovers! Discover how to design your Bread like a pro without worring about baker's calculation. The App demo here: https://youtu.be/jdsG2hybHy0 Google Play Store: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tost.gilles.frenchbreadrecipemaker Let's enjoy your bread recipes! Gilles
Recently I made this gluten free pizza for my younger daughter who has intolerance for the gluten and also should not eat cheese. Hence the pizza was made without cheese what is quite unusual, but it was generously topped with grilled vegetables. Here is a video about preparation. Happy baking, Joze
This is an 87% rye with a lot going on: a 3-stage rye sponge, a whole-wheat sponge, and a rye flour soaker. It calls for medium rye, which is a difficult thing to pin down. All I have at the moment are white rye and a finely milled whole rye, so I mixed and matched those two flours in various percentages for this bread. It also calls for 4 tsps Brotgewürz. I used 2 tsps of the bread spice I already had mixed up, the bulk of which is ground caraway. It's not very noticeable, which is the way I like it. The total flour is almost 1kg, and I succumbed to the temptation to make two loaves instead of one as called out in the recipe. Next time I will definitely make one big loaf.
I stopped off at the local IGA and purchased the very convenient small pack of yeast at 82 cents and 2kgs of black and gold flour $1.50 and took them to my daughters house where i was to mind my eldest teenage grand daughter (school holidays) and my wife had the other 2 at our house (sleepover). The minding of the teenager is relatively easy they sleep in then when they do wake get straight onto their electronic devices, so making a loaf was to give me something to do. There was some sweet potato in the cupboard so it was going to be put to good use, i quickly worked out a formula for a 750g loaf whilst the sweet potato was cooking. There was no need to rush this dough as it would need to go back to my place to be baked as the daughters oven is not working, the yeast was going to be @1% but it was to be added to all the water and an equal weight of the flour this was bought together and set aside covered (Autolyse). The remaining flour ,salt,coconut oil which i have not used before and the sweet potato now cooked and mashed were made ready to be added to the ferment that was activated. After 1 hour the remaining ingredients were pitched in and the dough mixing commenced this was accomplished by hand on the bench. The dough was given a half hour reprieve and rested before a bit more bench action and a nice smooth elastic dough was achieved this was then placed in a bowl to Bulk ferment for several hours. once my wife and the other 2 grand daughters arrived after their visit to the local park that has a flying fox i was relieved of my minding duties and took my dough with me home. I determined that the dough was ready so knocked it back and handed it up to expel the gas and bring it back to a compact shape. it was then covered and given a 30 minute rest. The dough was then shaped and placed in a lined Banneton proofing basket it was placed into a plastic bag and put into the fridge as i was unsure how long the final proof would take and i was due to take my grand nephew for a driving lesson, so the retarding would suit me best. The lesson went well and he will be booking his test very soon. I taught his dad my Nephew to drive many years back. Upon return the dough had still risen i the fridge but it hadn't overproofed so half an hour on the bench whilst the oven heated was Goldie Locks porridge (just right) i was going to bake directly on the pizza stone and utilise a tray with a folded terry towel and boiling water to produce a good steamy environment for the first 10 minutes of the bake when the rapid expansion takes place. The dough piece was rolled from the banneton onto the hot stone, it was brushed with a boiled cornflour wash and sprinkled with poppy seed and given a deep lengthwise slash and some supplementary cuts along the sides the dough was then placed into the oven with the already steaming tray/towel doing its job, for the initial 10 minutes the oven is cranked up full as the steam effect does have a dampening effect on the heat. After 10 minutes and the loaf has finished its spring the door is opened and the tray removed the temperature lowered to 210 and the bake continues. when the towel is hung up in the laundry you can see the amount of steam still coming from it. A further 20 - 25 minutes and the loaf is done pulled from the oven and onto a rack to cool ,be photographed and once quite cool cut open and tasted . So there we have it a Sweet Potato loaf using compressed yeast with a dusting of Turmeric.
Starter out of fridge almost a week All KAF AP 1200g dough.  Seems like a good fit for my equipment. And makes the math easy ;) Baked in preheated Rompertof Baked until 210 and "dried" in cracked oven Rise and oven spring seemed solid, but crumb is pretty closed? And not "gummy", but not dry either.  Crust is dry and crisp.
Last week I was trying to enjoy my trip to NY, and I met up with The Roadside Pie King for a couple of slices of pizza (imagine that!).  But then Abe sent a link to me from the ace bakers at The Weekend Bakery and encouraged me to give it a go.  Upon returning home the other evening, I decided to do just that yesterday and a bake this morning. But, as fate often intercedes in moments like these, alfanso decided to go almost far afield from their posted formula and do some funny stuff in an effort to "make it his own". ***Edit: Mistakenly posted as T160, but it should have read T150 - which is similar to the US Whole Wheat/UK Whole Meal.  Spreadsheet corrected as well.  The toasted sesame seeds refer only to wha is mixed in and not what is rolled onto the crust.*** I have a fair amount of the tritordeum T150 left from my trip to Barcelona in April, so I decided this would be a fine time to incorporate some into this mix.  Changes from the WE Bakery posted formula: 4x400g baguettes/long batards Perhaps a more open crumb at 72% hydration?  But I'm not hung up on that sort of thang. The formula normalized to 1000g
We call this "bibingka" in the Philippines but I better call it the "Manny Pacquiao Bread." Why? This bibingka is actually a celebratory rice cake customarily eaten on morning masses in the country months before Christmas. However, in the modern times, the Filipino Coconut-Rice Cake is now a common street food that you can even buy in the groceries. It's an exquisite side dish with an edge of sweetness, and can easily be party of your meal or snacks. Cooked in cast-iron for a profoundly brilliant outside, and concealing cuts of salty saved eggs, the bibingka is topped with ground cheddar that gets darker and fresh. I will eat lots of bibingka as soon as Manny Pacquiao defeats Thurman. Yeah!
This is a khorasan oat sourdough, a lighter bread than I usually bake. I wanted a light, soft crumb while still including as much fresh milled whole grain as possible. In "Tartine 3" Robertson explains how he accomplishes this by way of various additions to his basic doughs using high extraction flours, porridges, soakers, sprouted grains.  So for this bread I mixed 300 g fresh milled high extraction khorasan flour with 700 g all purpose white flour, autolysed with 750 g water for 3 hours. Then I added 15 g sea salt, 250 g young l.evain (4 hours) and mixed with a series of stretch/folds to start the bulk fermentation; I did four more series of stretch/folds over the first two hours and left the dough to ferment.  After the second series of stretch/folds I mixed in 100 g cooked coarse ground khorasan and 100 g cooked steel cut oats (hoping the little bit of oat porridge would help keep the crumb soft and chewy).  I estimate the FDH about 85%.  The loaves were pre-shaped, rested for thirty minutes and then shaped and coated with a mixture of rolled flaked khorasan/oats/sifted bran.  I cold proofed the loaves overnight and baked directly from the fridge the next morning, covered 500 F for twenty minutes; 450 F for ten minutes and then uncovered directly on a baking stone 450 F for 20 minutes.  I also used the same recipe to make enough dough for a a separate pan loaf - wanted to see how it would work for a sandwich bread. The crumb shot To bake the pan loaf I used a large covered roasting pan. pre-heated and then loaded with some ice cubes and a small container of boiling water and the pan loaf I removed the loaf from the pan and finished it directly on the baking stone
I opened up a bottle of Rose wine from a local Long Island winery that I really enjoyed, so figured why not use it in my next bake.  I usually use a stronger full bodied red wine which also tends to add more color to the dough, but the lighter flavored Rose was a nice change of pace. Cherries are nice and sweet from the market now, so instead of using dried cherries I pitted some fresh ones for this bake and cut them up into pieces to add to the dough.  The sour cream really help make this bread nice and moist. Overall I was very happy with the outcome.  The crumb is moist and flavorful from the wine and sour cream.  The fresh milled spelt and whole wheat flours added plenty of flavor as well.  If you don't have any French Style flour, you can substitute bread flour or AP flour and this will come out just fine. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Soak the cherries (if using dried) in the wine or water until soft and strain out.  If using fresh cherries, pit them and cut into pieces as desired.  Try to drain as much extra juice out as you can.  This dough was extremely hydrated from the sour cream and the extra moisture from the cherries.  You can easily cut back some of the water and wine to get an easier to manage dough depending on your comfort level. Mix the flours  and the wine along with the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, sour cream and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  Add the cherries last and mix for about 30 seconds until incorporated.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  (NOTE: this dough really proofed up in my refrigerator and the spelt may have been the reason.  I only let it sit out for about 30 minutes at room temperature and then shaped and proofed for an hour at 78 degrees.  You will have to judge your timing so you don't get an over-proofed loaf.). Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Some photos from the gardens for your viewing pleasure :).
For single loaf weight 750 grams 40% Red Fife Hold 50 g of water Levain for single loaf weight 750 grams
The local dairy that I get my yogurt from is slowly expanding their products and the latest is a hard Herb Cheese. It is actually fairly strong tasting and the thyme really comes through. I thought it would be perfect with some roasted garlic and sun dried tomatoes. So here goes: Makes 3 loaves. Levain: 63 g starter 63 g water 110 g unbleached flour 15 g freshly milled Rye flour Dough: 750 g strong bakers unbleached flour 100 g freshly milled Kamut flour 100 g freshly milled Spelt flour 50 g freshly milled Rye flour 800 g filtered water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g Slate River yogurt 250 g levain from above Add-ins: 82 g Roasted Garlic (4 heads) 85 g Sun dried tomatoes 70 g Slate River Herb Cheese A few days before: Get your starter up to speed by feeding it two or three times. I fed mine 3 times with rye and unbleached flour. Oops! I forgot so I ended up feeding it only two nights before and sped it up by keeping it in a very warm place. Two nights before: Mix the starter with the water and then add the flours. Let ferment at room temperature (70 F or so) for 12 hours. Refrigerate until the morning of making the dough. Well that was the plan. 🙄Unfortunately I forgot and did this the night before. So it didn’t get any refrigerator time. The night before: Mill and measure out your flours and set aside covered. Roast the garlic and mash. (Cut off top of head, drizzle with olive oil, cover with foil and roast at 400 F for 45 minutes.) Chop sun-dried tomatoes, unless you get lucky like me and have the daughter find them already chopped. 😁Set aside. Grate Herb Cheese. Refrigerate garlic and cheese. Dough making day: Remove the levain from the fridge to warm up to room temperature. Mix the flours and the water in a stand mixer and mix on low for one or two minutes until you have a shaggy dough and no dry flour. Let autolyse for a couple of hours. Remove add-ins from fridge to bring to room temperature. Add the salt, the yogurt and the starter in chunks. Mix on low for 1 minute to mix the ingredients and then mix on the next speed up for 9 minutes to develop the gluten. Add the add-ins gradually and mix for a minute or two to distribute them throughout the dough. Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled bowl and cover. Place in a warm spot (82 F-My warm spot is my oven with the lights on and the door cracked open) and let ferment for 4 hours with two sets of stretches and folds at 50 and 100 minutes. My dough rose about 50% by the end of bulk fermentation. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~775g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Place the dough seam side down in rice floured bannetons. Cover and let sit for 15 minutes, then refrigerate for at least 12 hours. Mine were in the fridge for 16 hours. Baking Day: The next morning, heat the oven to 475 F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough, seam side up, inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more.
Ingredients For 25% greater weight pastry dough Directions Filling Instructions
Sift out the bran from dough flour, reserve 26 g for the leaven. Soak the rest, if any, in equal amount of whey taken from dough ingredients.
Made some green onion burger buns and some cinnamon buns
I gave watching the clock and finally achieved the results I wanted. Very happy with the crumb! According to my husband, it was amazingly tasty. This is a standard bakers percentage recipe. I did folds in intervals of 30 to 40mins, depending on what the dough told me. Apricots and walnuts were added during lamination. The loaf bulk fermented in the fridge till it looked ready to shape (about 24hours). However, when I was shaping, it felt that it can proof further. So it went back into the fridge in the banetton for another 12hours or so. It was baked direct on preheated baking stone, covered with stainless steel bowl (cos I dislike using DO) 25mins, uncovered 20mins.
My humble interpretation. I had no dried onion. I hear tell the substitution of finely diced fresh will not taste the same. However, I can attest that these smell out of this world!  I can also guarantee this will not be the last time I make this quick easy recipe! Follow this link for the original formula. With thanks to the generosity of Norm (may he rest in peace,) a baker with a a big heart! http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/8903/norm039s-ny-style-onion-rollsomg-great?fbclid=IwAR1_V6lSzxVlF8KdYElefiwfcNBeFHHKpBbTiWZ7SGRTk6WcQbB1lIyzvbQ The first comment contains the formula presented in bakers %. With my method.  Enjoy.
I always wanted to make this bread...and love that bun at the top and the character of this bread. I also have fond memories as long time ago as a student,  I cycled all the way through Galicia... I remember well Santiago de la Compostela and the 'Jakobsweg' a path which still many people walk for pilgrimage... Whilst there are formulas on you Tube in Spanish, I was surprised that there is not more information out there.... So I just had a go and treated it like a ciabatta at 85% hydration with a cold bulk. The shaping of the bun seems to be the toughest bit and whilst some videos show a baker pulling with the right hand and twirling dough with the left after final shaping ...mine stuck to the bench...so more flour needed next time to prevent sticking during pre-shape. when I want to pick up the dough for twirling....he, he.... I used 100% rye and 100% WW and the rest strong White and medium strong White...I think I might use less strong flour next time to get more extensibility for this type of bread... It is music festival season and with the exams being over I have teenagers in the house who happily demolish bread very quickly before they go off for the weekend...! If anyone knows of a good formula that would be much appreciated...any Pan Galego bakers out there????  Kat
Dear Bakers, My App to create avanced Bread Recipes is now Free of charge for most of the functions. Enjoy baking without having to make baker's percentage heavy calculations. Cheers, Gilles for French Bread Recipes team.
Grana Padano Sesame Seed Sourdough Crackers
This time I dramatically cut the bulk time, tuned down the hydration, further dehydrated the add-in veggies. Dough didn't rise much at all during fridge proof, I panicked, but I remembered how I failed last time so I went ahead and bake it anyway, it was a success! Recipe: 60g levain (20g ww starter fed with 20g rye 20g water) 60g dark rye 30g ww flour 250 g bread flour  260g water plus extra 30g for salt 8g salt plus extra pinch for veggie 200g black bean- coooked, lightly salted, mashed 1 tsp cumin(not packed!) plus extra pinch for veggies 1 tsp chipotle (not packed!) plus extra pinch for veggies 30 cracks of black pepper  150g chopped onions  70g chopped jalapenos, 3cloves garlic  30 cracks of fresh black pepper  5g butter/bacon fat/ any kind of fat Method: -build starter@85f - 3hr15 mins -Autolyse(flour, 260g water, spices)@room temp 2hrs  Caramalize onions on medium low heat with oil, a pinch of salt, pinch of cumin,chipotle, cook till onion take on a lil bit of color, add jalapeno, cook till fully caramelized and all veggies decrease volume by at least 2/3, add minced garlic the last 2 mins, don't rush this step as you want to dry out most of the moisture, my cooked veggie mixture only weighed 52g after cooling Mix levain with dough and spices> rest 15mins@ 85f Slap and fold 30 times immediately mix salt and reserved water as needed, follow by beans>veggies- > continue Slap and fold 30 more times> rest 45mins Slap and fold 30 tims>rest 45 mins Slap and fold 30 times>rest 1 hr 15 mins Directly shape and place into banneton  (You'll need to rely a lot on the bench scraper to tighten it up as the dough is very tacky) straight into fridge and retard for 12 hours Bake @ 500f covered 30 mins vent oven for 20 secs 450f uncovered 20mins (internal temp 205f) Notice the bulk time is very short, Otis(my sourdough starter)seemed to LOVE beans and@85f, the fermentation speed was almost out of control the first time, I swiched from traditional slap and fold followed by a series of stretch and fold the first time, to vigorously slap and fold 3 times over the very short bulk fermentation process, and it finally worked out!
I wanted to make some nice soft rolls/buns that would be perfect for burgers and sandwiches.  I had some leftover wild rice pilaf I made the other day and this along with the ricotta cheese made for a tasty bread. I used a little bit of freshly ground Kamut, rye and whole wheat flours combined with bread flour.  I have to say it turned out super soft and moist and tastes fantastic.  I highly recommend you try this one as you will not be disappointed. Note: the water content from the ricotta cheese is about 72% and is not indicated in the hydration.  This was a pretty sticky dough as the water from the ricotta and also the moist rice really made a big difference. You want to make sure to hold some water back from the first mix and add it after the first autolyse to make sure you don't end up over-hydrating the dough. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours, ricotta cheese  and 3/4's of the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, rice and salt and remainder of the water (see note at beginning of post), mix on low for 4 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 1 - 1.5 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1 to 1.5 hours.  Remove the dough and divide into pieces approximately 135-150 grams depending on how big you want the rolls.  Place them on a baking sheet and cover with a slightly damp lint-free towel or use plastic wrap and spray with veggie spray.  Depending on the room temperature it should take 1 - 2 hours for them to rise about 1/3 in size.  Before baking use an egg wash if desired or if you want them even softer you can brush with some melted butter or milk. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 475 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Lower the temperature to 440 degrees.  Bake for around 25 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 195 -200 degrees. Take the rolls out of the oven when done and let them cool on a bakers rack before for at least 1 hour before eating, (I doubt you will resist, so go ahead and eat them nice and hot with some butter!).
Hi, This was my attempt at a 77% hydration walnut and green olive sourdough using 25% whole wheat flour. It was 100 degrees outside and about 85 in my apartment, so I tried to make sure that I didn't over do the proof time. I ended up doing 4 hours for the levain and 3.75 hours for the bulk ferment followed by a 12 hour overnight proof. I used 171g of 80% hydration levain that was 50/50 bread and wheat flours.I made sure to keep the pre-ferment flour inoculation low because of the heat. I did a 4 hour autolyse with 636g bread flour, 50g rye, and 170g whole wheat and 655 grams of 50 degree water at the same time as the levain build. I added 18g of salt when I made the final dough. I mixed in 1 cup walnuts, lemon zest, herbs, and 2 cups chopped olives during my second set for 40 slap and folds. (I did two sets of 40 slap and folds and 3 stretch and folds). For the bake I did 25 minutes with lid on, but I think I should have left it on for another 5 minutes. Overall, decent looking split, but I wish I'd gotten a bit more rise in height. (The image above is 1 loaf of my olive bread and 1 of the tomato/pesto bread. The pesto bread opened up better, but not sure why)
Hi, This was my attempt at a 77% hydration sun dried tomato, kale pesto, and seed sourdough using 25% whole wheat flour. It was 100 degrees outside and about 85 in my apartment, so I tried to make sure that I didn't over do the proof time. I ended up doing 4 hours for the levain and 3.75 hours for the bulk ferment followed by a 12 hour overnight proof. I used 171g of 80% hydration levain that was 50/50 bread and wheat flours.I made sure to keep the pre-ferment flour inoculation low because of the heat. I did a 4 hour autolyse with 636g bread flour, 50g rye, and 170g whole wheat and 655 grams of 50 degree water at the same time as the levain build. I added 18g of salt when I made the final dough. I mixed in 1 cup sun dried tomato, 50g sunflower seeds, and 50g pumpkin seeds during my second set for 40 slap and folds. (I did two sets of 40 slap and folds and 4 stretch and folds). I added my 1 cup of homemade kale pesto during the last (4th stretch and fold). I did a pre-shape and final shape 15 minutes later (was scared to do the full 30 minutes because it was so hot in my kitchen). This dough felt really great and easy to work with, but then one of the two loaves kind of fell apart during the shaping process because all of the pesto started to fall out of the bottom. I ended up baking this one leaf seam-side up. It definitely didn't get the same rise during the bake as if it had been shaped properly. The bread tastes good, but I am not sure the pesto really comes through. I don't think I'll be adding pesto to bread again. This bread was also a bit more sour than my prior loaves because I did a 3-stage levain build.
311 g white bread flour 46 g whole wheat flour 21 g dark rye flour 2 tbsp freshly chopped rosemary leaves 3 g celery seeds 287 g warm water reserve 21 g for later 31 g tomato paste 1.5 teaspoon olive oil 7.5 g salt 77 g levain This is only the second sourdough loaf that I’ve baked that has had any sort of an ear on it.  I think I’ve improved my final shaping a bit, I believe I hadn’t been using enough flour on my hands causing my hands to stick to the relatively high hydration dough.  Secondly, I think I hadn’t been scoring deeply enough.  The best part of the ear on this loaf was where I scored the deepest.  I hope that things will continue to improve from here with more baking.
Hi everyone, I was wondering if anyone know of a site where I can download a manual for a Breville bakers oven breadmaker BB200?. Thankyou in advance
Stiff dough (70% excluding porridge) yet crumb isn't too close
Method is very similar to my chai sourdough, dust with cocoa instead of tea leaves. Crumb is more open than that despite increased whole grain because I ran out of milk and used less(less enriched, more open), and less of the swirling effect I usually get because of that too(less milk, darker color crumb> cocoa swirl less pronounced)
I'm on a mission to try out every beanny combo in sourdough baking! Using canned cannellini beans this time, and slightly more bean to dough ratio. I was amazed how differently the dough felt with white beans vs black beans, I'm not sure if it's the canned process or the types of beans really... -fermention speed was rather normal compared to black beans last time, which picked up the speed real fast. -  I was able to perform the traditional folds as opposite to having to slap and fold 3 times! The starch in black beans seemed to be a lot "heavier" it slacked right down quick and gets extremely sticky.The starch in white bean was quite a bit lighter and holds it's shape between s/f, a lot easier to work with! Both loaves got wonderfully tender crumb thanks to the beans, but they're different..... The crumb in the black bean sourdough was a starchy kind of soft. With the white bean sourdough, it's more of a custardy kind of soft, if you look at the close up crumb shot, it looks a lot like an oat porridge bread, and the texture is very similar to one as well! Recipe: 60g levain(20g ww starter fed with 20g rye 20g water)120g whole kamut  220 g bread flour  260g water plus extra 30g for salt(I used 20g) 8g salt  220g white bean- (canned ,rinsed and drain, mashed)1/2 tsp Italian seasoning(not packed!)  1/2 tsp dried sage (not packed!) 10 cracks of black pepper 4 stalks of green onions (toasted with bacon fat)2 slices if thick cut bacon(chopped, crisped, drained out excess fat) 30g red Leicester chesse cubes 4 hour ish warm bulk: 1 set of slap and fold 30 mins after mixing,salt was added 3 set of folding 45 mins apart, fold in add-ins during the first set left untouched for 1hr15-30 mins Shape and retard for 15 hrs Bake@500f 25mins covered 450f 25mins uncovered What kind of beans should I try next time? Japanese adzuki bean for a sweet loaf is already on my list! But that's gotta wait till my next trip to an Asian grocery store
Ingredients for 750 g loaf (not including seeds) Levain build for 750 g loaf 1. Levain – 9:00 a.m. 2. Autolyse – 3:00 p.m. 3. Prepare Seeds – 3:10 p.m. 4. Mix – 5:00 p.m. 5. Bulk Fermentation – 5:10 p.m. to 8:50 p.m. 6. Divide & Preshape – 8:50 p.m. 7. Shape – 9:10 p.m. 8. Rest & Proof – 9:15 p.m. 9. Bake – Next Morning: Preheat oven at 6:15 a.m., Bake at 7:15 a.m.
CM made this a couple of weeks ago and it looked absolutely scrumptious! And since I have quite a bit of Khorasan (Kamut) berries on hand, this was perfect. I slightly tweaked his ingredients by adding a bit more porridge (didn’t want to waste what I had made) and a touch of yogurt. I suspect that CM salts his porridge as he uses a lot less salt in his recipe. I like sticking around 2 %. The mixing method is mostly mine since I use a stand mixer. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Porridges: 50 g large flake oats plus 100 g water (I got 148 g of porridge) 50 g very coarse ground Khorasan (I put the dot of my Komo mill to the middle back of the machine) plus 100 g water (I got 138 g of porridge) Dough: 300 g fresh milled high extraction Khorasan (Kamut) flour (315 g Kamut berries) 700 g strong bakers unbleached flour 700 g water + 25 g + 25 g 23 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g yogurt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) Whole grain and AP flour to feed levain The afternoon before: Mill the Khorasan berries for the main dough and sift to obtain the needed amount of high extraction flour. Place the required amount in a tub. Save the bran for dusting the bannetons. Reserve any leftover high extraction flour for feeding the Levain in the evening and the next day. I had very little left over. Add the unbleached flour to the tub. Cover and reserve. Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g whole grain flour (Rye/Spelt/Khorasan/wheat). Let rise in a warm place. The night before: Add the water to the rolled oats and cook on low until very creamy and all the water has been absorbed. Cover and put into the fridge for the night. This can be done in the morning if you wish. Do the same with the coarse ground Khorasan and the water. This took a lot longer than the oats before all the grains were tender. I believe it took about 45 minutes. Cover and refrigerate as well. Before going to bed, feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g whole grain flour. Let that rest in a warm spot overnight. Dough Making day: Early in the morning, feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of AP flour and let rise 4-5 hours in a warm spot. Mine doubled in 4 hours. One hour after feeding the levain, put 700 g filtered water in a stand mixer’s bowl and add the flours from the tub.  Mix on the lowest speed until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes a couple of minutes. Cover and autolyse for 2.5-3 hours at room temperature (73F). Remove the porridges from the fridge and let them warm up to room temperature. Once the levain is ready, add the salt, the yogurt, the first 25 g of water and the levain to the dough. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed for 7 and a half minutes. Add both porridges as well as the last 25 g of water, and mix for another 2 and a half minutes until well distributed. Remove dough from bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest in a warm spot to begin bulk fermentation. My warm spot is the oven with the door cracked open and the lights on. I get an ambient temperature of around 82F. Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise for another hour and a half for a total bulk of 4 hours. My dough was moving really fast for some reason and was ready after 45 minutes. 😳The dough had risen by about 30 % and had irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. It felt especially silky and aerated. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~775 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let it rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities or big bubbles. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Sprinkle some Khorasan bran and large flake oats in the bannetons. If your bannetons are not well seasoned, sprinkle rice flour first, then the bran and the oats. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Cover with plastic bowl covers or shower caps. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. My total proof time was 14 hours for the first batch and 15 for the second. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475 F with the Dutch ovens inside for an hour. The dough rose quite a bit and felt very soft. I was afraid that it might have overproofed. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. Happy to see that there was decent oven spring! I’ll cut back on the proof a bit next time though. Crumb shot when we cut into one!
Levain:20g ww starter +20g whole einkorn flour +20g water Dough: Whole Einkorn flout 220g bf 220g water 330g(plus extra 25g for salt)- Autolyse 3 hours in room temp mix> rest 30minsadd salt and remaining water as needed(I use most but not all, follow by 5mins of slap and fold> rest 30 min4 sets of s/f 30 mins apart Left untouched for 1hr- 1hr 15 mins Shape and retard for 12-18hrs Bake@500f covered 20mins 450f uncovered 25 mins internal temp 205f Help...can someone teach me how to do a double slash properly? There's a reason why I stick to single slash for batards and either square/circle/ cross for boules. Because I'm incapable of doing everything else right😅 It just ended up growing free style everytime and the designs are gone. Anyway this is the first time I tried using a wheat germ and parmesan crust on a loaf. Half wheat germ and half parmesan, by volume not by weight. I just eyeballed it so no measurements. I chose the wrong technique(attempted to pick up a sticky einkorn loaf and roll it on the crumbs...for the experiment and ended up having to reshape and recoat it with the crumbs after the initial fail. The second time around I reshaped> brush the top and sides with some egg white>sprinkle crumbs on top and sides and flip it with a bench scraper http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/60854/anyone-had-experience-coating-loaf-wheat-germ#comment-438463 P.S. Thanks Mini oven for suggesting a much better method by using a towel, I'll definitely try that next time instead! The result was a win tho, the crust was incredibly crisp, nutty with a hint of caramelized cheese! Like a super thin cheese cracker! Definitely a great addition to one of my favorite loaves! It's lost a tiny bit of volume compared to my usually bake with the same recipe, but I think it has more to do with the reshaping rather than my awful scoring. I think my slashes were too shallow, not straight and not long enough. But I'd appreciate any advices as I've never got a good result making a double slash My single slashes aren't always that good either This is as clean as I could ever managed and it only happens maybe every 5 bakes...if you look at it closely you'd notice it's still not clean.I always hesitate before slashing and having to adjust it, that's definitely one of my problems.
I promised a couple of my friends that I would bring them some bread when we met up for lunch this week.  I had a few purple sweet potatoes in the pantry and wanted to use them in this bake.  The last time I used them the color did not come through very well, so I upped the amount of potato to 35% and the color really came out perfect.  The purple sweet potato is not as high in water content as the orange style and not as sweet, but it does add a wonderful texture to the bread that is worth trying. I also used some freshly milled whole wheat flour with the bran sifted out using a #40 sieve as well as some spelt, also sifted.  My procedure is to then re-mill the flour at the finest setting which I have been finding really works well. Since I was gifting these I didn't get a crumb shot of the loaves, but I made one small roll to try for myself and you can see the wonderful purple tinted open crumb further below. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the sweet potato with 90% of the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, olive oil, salt and the balance of the water and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Below is the nice moist and colorful crumb. Some photos from the gardens for your viewing pleasure :).
A version of Trevor Wilson's Champlain bread. Thank you to the community bake thread for this bread for a lot of good advice. Process Ambient temperature was 80--82F throughout. Two days before:take starter from fridge, leave out on counter, feed at 1:3:3 around midnight One day before: feed 1:3:3 around noon, then 1:3:3 at midnight with 5g start, half whole wheat, half AP 945 Mix dough: 315g water at 90F, 200g KA AP (11.7% gluten), 189g KA bread flour (12.7% gluten), 38g spelt, 19g rye, 315g water. Rubaud to develop. Took 100g of dough and mixed with 50g leaven. 1115 Add leaven to dough 1145 Add 9g salt and 10g water 1215 Fold 1300 Fold 1330 Fold 1400 Fold 1515 Preshape. Care was taken to avoid deflation, and the ball was a little bit looser than usual. 1550 Shape. The round had mostly flattened, but there was noticably tension left in it. Used careful letter folds, then tightened on the counter, then let stand for 5 minutes to seal the seam. It seemed a little bit soft when in the proofing basket, so some light stitching was done to fix it. 1845 Bake. Dutch oven preheated to 475F and lower temperature to 450F. Bake for 20 minutes, then uncover, then bake for 20 more minutes. Results I normally bake at 500F, but in an effort to avoid scorched crust, a lower temperature was used. The bottom crust is golden but not burnt. The crumb of this loaf is light and had a noticable chew due to the bread flour. The flavor was mild, with only a hint of sourness. Future work While the crumb was fairly light in this loaf, it would be nice to make it lacier. To this end, it might be worth lengthening the bulk a little and perhaps pushing the folds back, since in this schedule, only the final hour of bulk is fold-free.  More generally, my preshaping and shaping skills need work. I think that being more careful than usual on both of those steps was very helpful for this loaf. I am also unsure of about the impact of the "pseudo-preferment" that was allowed to ferment for just 1.5 hours during the autolyse. The goal was to kick-start the bulk fermentation a bit without having to add more leaven. At the very least, the impact does not seem to have been negative, although further testing is needed to see if it is actually beneficial.
Recently I encounter someone attempting to make a beet infused bread. It was greatly disappointing for the baker to discover that the beautiful color of beets did not survive the baking process. Well, this got me thinking about what vegetable could be incorporated into bread to make a purple loaf. One answer is the mighty purple sweet potato. I have successfully used a potato water sourdough recipe from Northwest Sourdough before, so when I saw that she also had a Purple Sweet Potato sourdough I was decided. After a special trip to the upscale grocer to find a purple sweet potato and feeding up my fridge-napping starter I was ready to go. Purple Sweet Potato Sourdough from Northwest Sourdough Levain: 150 grams starter + 75 grams AP Flour + 75 grams water Dough: 600 grams AP flour + 360 grams water + 420 grams pureed sweet potato + 18 grams salt I created a levain mid-afternoon and when it was vigorously bubbling away (about 5 hours in my warm kitchen) I added the flour and water for autolyse. An hour later the pureed sweet potato and salt were added, squishing and folding everything together until the dough started to stiffen. Then bulk ferment about three and half hours with stretch and fold every 45 minutes. It was well into the evening when I pre-shaped, shaped, and put in the refrigerator for a 9 hour overnight retard. Early this morning I heated the oven to 500F along with the pizza stone and my stainless steel mixing bowl cloche. Baked the loafs one at a time, turning the oven down to 450F, covered for 15 minutes, then 18-20 minutes uncovered. The loafs hung out in the oven with the door propped open while it cooled, in attempt to dry out the crumb a bit more. The color held in the baked bread very well. The crumb is soft and moist, and the crust has a bit of chew. There is a distinct and unique flavor. Overall a fun bake. My dough handling could be improved as I think I deflated one of the loaves taking it out of the proofing bowl, and probably they needed to go in the fridge a bit sooner.  Also, I think the dough could have really benefited from some additional gluten either with a stronger flour or with the addition of VWG. My tendency to try everything with AP flour is probably not ideal for a bread with so much added vegetable.
This was a change from my usual routine as I made only one batch of dough! It’s a long weekend and I got orders for only 2 loaves. This turned out to be a good thing since my daughter ran her trial half marathon and I biked behind her to keep her company. Some celebrating and having to go back to the starting point ate up more time than planned as did a side trip to the Farmers Market. Therefore bread making was quite delayed. Making one batch was a nice change. This week’s bread is Einkorn with barley porridge. I thought that barley would go nicely with the Einkorn and it turns out that both were grown in Ancient Egypt so that’s how I came up with the name. 😊 Recipe Makes 3 loaves Porridge: 75 g barley flakes 150 g water Dough: 675 g strong bakers unbleached flour 300 g high extraction Einkorn flour (315 g Einkorn berries) 575 g filtered water + 50 g 22 g salt 30 g yogurt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) The afternoon before: Mill the Einkorn berries for the main dough and sift to obtain the needed amount of high extraction flour. Place the required amount in a tub. Save the bran for dusting the bannetons. Reserve any leftover high extraction flour for feeding the Levain in the evening and the next day. I had very little left over. Add the unbleached flour to the tub. Cover and reserve. Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g whole grain flour (whatever you have on hand). Let rise in a warm place. The night before: Add the water to the barley flakes and cook on low until quite thick and all the water has been absorbed. I ended up with 221 g of porridge. Cover and put into the fridge for the night. This can be done in the morning if you wish. Before going to bed, feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g whole grain flour. Let that rest in a warm spot overnight. Dough Making day: The next day, feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of AP flour and let rise 3-4 hours in a warm spot. My warm spot is the oven with the door cracked open and the lights on. I get an ambient temperature of around 82F. Mine doubled in 3 hours. One hour after feeding the levain, put the filtered water in a stand mixer’s bowl and add the flours from the tub.  Mix on the lowest speed until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes a couple of minutes and makes a very stiff dough. Cover and autolyse for 2 -3 hours at room temperature (73F). Because the levain matured so quickly, I only autolysed for 2 hours. At the same time, remove the porridge from the fridge and let it warm up to room temperature. Once the levain is ready, add the salt, the yogurt, and the levain to the dough. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed for 4 minutes. I reduced the mixing time because I read that Einkorn doesn’t like to be over mixed. Add the porridge and extra water, and mix for another minute or two until well distributed. Remove dough from bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest in a warm spot to begin bulk fermentation. Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise about 30 %. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. This was one hour after the last fold for this particular dough. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~715 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let it rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities or big bubbles. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Sprinkle some Einkorn bran and barley flakes in the bannetons. If your bannetons are not well seasoned, sprinkle rice flour first, then the bran and the barley. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Cover with plastic bowl covers or shower caps. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. My total proof time was 12 hours. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475 F with the Dutch ovens inside for an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. I got really good oven spring. The boules might have been slightly underproofed, which I suspected might happen since I only had three loaves in the fridge rather than 12, and that would cause the 3 to cool down more quickly. A bit more of counter time before retarding might be a good idea.
By: The Roadside Pie King The original plan called for candied ginger and candied rosemary. Well don't you know I brought basil by mistake? I decided to go with the flow. Please mind your eye on photos one through three, candied basil. The next step called for pealing the fresh, frozen at the peak of flavor peaches. The skins were to be discarded however they smelled so darn good I decided to pulverize them with the sugars. The still partially frozen peaches are de-stoned and sliced. By this time the candied basil has dried. The candied ginger and candied basil were combined, finely ground and set aside. The dry spices, chopped fresh basil, salt, extracts and the sugar/skin mixture were combined with the peaches. The bottom pastry was rolled out, placed into the 9" pan and the filling was added. The pie was set aside in the refrigerator. The top pastry was prepared and placed on the filled shell. The completed pie is set to chill in the refrigerator. The oven is pre-heated. Just before baking, the top of the pie is painted with egg white, and the candied ginger/basil mixture is sprinkled on top. The pie is baked till golden, (60 minutes)
A-Lot-Of-Teff... 40% teff, 20% wholewheat, 40% bread flour My old bakes were 20/20/60. Crumb is a lot denser this time, which is fine and expected, I like dense bread too. But shaping was a nightmare and the flavor didn't really change that much. Conclusion:20% teff is ideal, 40% is not worth the trade off of bloom and especially VERY difficult shaping. 20190804_121409.jpg Original recipe ratio:(dough) 270g bf 90g teff 90g whole wheat  360g water, plus extra for salt IF needed Bread in the photos ratio: 180g bf 180g teff 90g whole wheat ,same amount of water  Add-ins: 80g chopped dates 40g chopped pistachios zest of 1 orange Prepare dough for room temp long autolyse  For the quick levain: Take 40g of the dough and feed it to 40g of starter (my starter is 10%hydration ww), put it something warm, it'll be ready in 3 hours. Mix>30mins Add 9g salt and mix> 30mins Do 3 more 30min folds, fold all add ins@ 2nd set and 2 more 45 min folds Let rest 1hr 15 min untouched  Shape and retard 12-18 hours Alternatively, you can put the dough in the fridge right after finishing all the 30mins folds. Retard for 12-18 hours, preshape and rest for 30 mins, shape and warm proof for about 1.5 to 2hrs before baking, result will be the same Bake@ 500f 20mins covered 450f 25-30 mins uncovered
I thought this would be a good bread to test out my yeast water. Problem is, I weighed and mixed it while a crisis was unfolding and I must have weighed my water wrong. The dough was a sloppy mess and fermented so fast I didn't think I could do anything with it. I threw it into the fridge to try and reign in the out of control fermenting going on. It was 2 hours in bulk and already very proofy and I had only done 1 fold and it was just spiraling out of control. In the fridge after 1 hour it was still growing and growing, so I decided to just throw in the towel and shape and bake. I didn't even take photos during the process because it was just a crazy mess. This bread normally ferments 5-6 hours for me. This is how it turned out with 3 hours total bulk. It actually didn't turn out that bad, and it was delicious with a very slightly sweet scent. I'm making it again tomorrow with more care to my weighing..
I started this at the same as my post with  champlain leavened with yeast water, but this one fermented as expected. Using Hamelmans swiss farmhouse as a recipe building starting point, I used 10% yeast water to start my levain. For 4 dough balls of 230 grams for a total of 920 grams Build 1 : 81 grams 5 stagione tipo 00 51 grams apple yeast water Fermented for about 6 hours at RT where it tripled in size and had a nice dome Build 2 : 120 grams 5 stagione tipo 00 76 grams regular water 137 first build Fermented overnight for about 10 hours at RT where it more than tripled and had just peaked Final dough: 308 grams 5 stagione tipo 00 217 grams water 10 grams salt 51 grams discard (for some extra flavor) 333 grams apple yeast water levain Started with 1 hour autolyse but felt the dough needed a little more time so I could mix by hand. Ended up with a 2 hour autolyse. I added the rest of the ingredients in one go to the autolyse dough. It was  a little strong so I had do some old fashioned elbow grease mixing and kneading, then gave it a 1 hour rest and then did one fold. Since it still felt strong and tight, I decided to leave it at 1 fold. I used a good glug of nice olive oil in my bulk container as a sort of double hydration/bassinage. Which the dough absorbed by the end of bulk. It really started to take off and at 3 hours had almost doubled so I decided to divide and shape. After shaping it wasn't slowing down so after 15 minutes it went into the fridge at for about 26 hours. This afternoon at around 2 I took them out for dinner around 7. It was lovely and easy to stretch. I'm not great with pizza, as I'm still trying to figure out the best settings in my oven. This is baked on a baking steel approximately 10 inches away from the top element. It started closer, but the dough rose so much it tore when I wanted to turn it. I gave it a 1 minute par bake so I wouldn't have  a soggy bottom and then finished topping with tomato sauce, grilled mushrooms, onions, tomatos and chorizo and fresh mozzarella and a little pecorino romano. Delicious!
After an epic failure Saturday (I decided to create my own porridge sourdough recipe and it was pancake batter), I decided to try the Sarah Owens recipe for Seeded Turmeric and Leek Sourdough from her book Sourdough. I made some slight modifications. I did 1.5x the recipe since her loaves are on the small side. The recipe was 75% hydration, but closer to 80% including the olive oil used to sauté the leeks. I sautéed 275g of leeks with 1tsp turmeric and black pepper. Once browned, I took off heat and added 20g poppy seeds, 30g flax, and 1 diced shallot. The add-ins were incorporated in the 2nd set of mixing. I really focused on improving my shaping method this time and also used an oiled bowl for the bulk since I felt I was tearing the gluten removing the dough from my 6qt Cambro container. One of my scores was awesome and the other one not so much. The crumb was pretty standard for me, but trying not to worry too much about a fairly closed crumb and instead focus on how moist ant tasty it is!
I decided that I wanted to change things up a bit this week, after falling into a rut making the same bread every week for a while.  Looking back through some of my favorite breads from the past, I decided that I would bake a rye sourdough with a nod to PiP's 40% rye. Formula 343g AP 254g Dark Rye (Bob's Red Mill) 38g WW (fresh milled, hard red spring) 120g mature levain (100% hydration, fed WW flour) 385g Water 13g Salt I used my typical process for this bread.  Mix all but the salt until incorporated, then rest for 30 minutes.  Add salt, use pinch method to incorporate, slap/fold about 30x, rest 30 minutes.  Gentle stretch folds about 20x, rest 30 minutes.  Four gentle folds, rest 90 minutes.  Four gentle folds to help release the dough from the container, then pre-shape and rest for 15 minutes.  Final shaping (batard in this case), proof in a banneton for 75 minutes, then into the fridge for about 4 hours. (NOTE: all "resting" done at RT since it was pretty warm.) Bake covered at 475F for 15 minutes, then uncovered for 20 minutes. I was very happy with how this turned out, and I think my dough handling skills are getting better......I remember this same bread at same hydration really being a major pain the first time I made it! :) Fresh out of the oven: Crumb shot: Kicking myself for not making some pastrami...... :) Rich
Day 1: 08/07/2019 10:00 A,M. Eastern Daylight Saving Time (GMT -4)
Hello everyone.  Have been baking breads for 59 years and still learning.  Found this blog today while looking for a way to salvage an old dough bowl I purchased at a yard sale some years ago.  The bowl developed a crack and I'm hoping to save it as I love old items.  Have two old rolling pins.  One was given to me 59 years ago when an elderly lady was breaking up home and she asked if I could use it.  Yep!  Have use it exclusively all these years and it's like brand new.  Rescued another similar one from a yard sale.  Was wondering if dough can be raised in an old crock as I have several of those.  I have made fermented cabbage(sauerkraut).  Just love making bread though and have made gluten free bread as well.  So happy to have found you.
The Roadside Pie king method Here you have it pie lovers the complete unabridged Pie King method. Enjoy!
20190809_150252.jpg 20190809_150452.jpg 20190809_150700.jpg With pureed chipotle with adobo sauce, a spicy loaf 😋I like the color! The ground chorizo taste so good, but it makes an ugly looking crumb, kind of look like patches of some kind of brownish porridge that I failed to mix in lol next time I'll use a diced up dried chorizo instead. Another failed double slash, too straight, too long...
It has been forever since Lucy made a bread of any kind or posted about it.  I don’t eat bread anymore because my diabetes is harder to control and I would rather drink a glass of wine, beer and bourbon after thinking about it - when sober. Hard to get snockered on one glass though.  It’s like being in a diet by limiting the plate size.
Build #1 was extremely slow and I started to think that my mango yeast water didn't work. I ended up letting it go 15 hours (eeek!). My Build #2 seemed to go extremely fast so I called it after 7 hours as it looked domed, puffy, and had risen abut 3x. Approximately 80 degrees inside. I did 2.5 hours for the bulk ferment and 2 hours for the final as it wasn't passing the finger dent test. The dough felt great to work with. This is pretty much my typical crumb. Would have liked it to be more open, but it tastes good. Not sure what happened to all of the fruit! The loaves had a nice expansion in the oven, but then crust definitely looks different than all of my other loaves. Very fun to try using YW. Thanks to Danny for leading the community bake! Build #2 Final proof:
I haven't been posting here much of late. I have been mostly baking variations on a multi-grain sourdough - some mix of heritage wheats, rye, kamut and spelt - with the whole grain flours between 30 and 50% of total flour and all home-milled. The last few days, I've had a hankering for San Joaquin Sourdough baguettes, and this morning we made a run to our favorite Italian deli where I bought some toscana salami and caciocavallo cheese, which makes my favorite sandwich. I got home, took the retarding dough out of the fridge and had that sandwich on very fresh baked bread. As Flanders and Swann wrote in their "Cannibal Song," "A chorus of yums went 'round the table." But, not content with plain old baguettes, I used the dough to shape 3 different versions of San Joaquin Sourdough - a small baguette, an epi de blé and a fougasse. And, finally, the sandwich (minus a couple bites): Happy baking! David
I revisited this upon request from one of my customers. I changed up some of the grains (Spelt and Kamut instead of Durum), added extra feta and Sundried tomatoes, and decided to go with a longer mixing time rather than sifting and soaking the bran. This last part made for a slightly more streamlined procedure. Hopefully it pays off. Recipe Note: I mill more grain berries than needed in order to have extra to feed the levain builds. So add extra grain berries to the amounts listed below unless you have other wholegrain flours handy to use. Makes 3 loaves 150 g Spelt flour (~155 g Spelt berries) 150 g Kamut flour (~155 g Kamut berries) 50 g of rye flour (~55 g Rye berries) 700 g of unbleached flour 725 g of filtered water 10 g Old Bay seasoning 15 g Pink Himalayan salt 30 g yogurt 250 g levain (procedure is in recipe and will need additional wholewheat flour and unbleached flour) Add-ins 143 g of drained sliced mixed olives (49 g Kalamata, 48 g Manzanilla and 46 g Black) or (375 ml jars or cans of each type) 94 g crumbled Feta (Who knew that a 90 g pkg yielded 94 g! 🤔) 72 g Seasoned Sun-dried Tomatoes in oil, drained and oil reserved (2-270 ml jars) The afternoon before: Take 18 g of your refrigerated starter and add 18 g of filtered water and 18 g of wholegrain flour (your choice- I used mostly rye). Let rise in a warm place (oven with the light on - ~82F). Mill the grains on the finest setting of your mill. Measure the Spelt, Kamut, and rye flours and place in a tub. Save any leftover flour to feed the levain. Add the unbleached flour to the milled flours and reserve. The night before: Feed the levain 36 g of filtered water and 36 g of wholegrain flour. Let rise overnight in a warm place. Dough making day: Feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of unbleached flour. Let rise in a warm place till double. This took about 5 hours. Measure the feta, crumble if needed, and set aside. Drain (save the oil) and weigh the sun-dried tomatoes, (slice if not sliced), measure out 25 g of the reserved oil, and add both to the feta. Drain the olives, weigh, and add to the feta mix. 2 hours or so before the levain is ready, mix the water with the flours and autolyse. This takes a minute or two in a mixer. Let autolyse for at least a couple of hours. Once the levain is ready, add the Old Bay seasoning, the salt, the yogurt, and the levain. Mix for a minute on low until the levain is integrated, then mix on speed 2 for 9 minutes to develop the gluten. Add the feta, the olives, and the sun-dried tomatoes/oil mix gradually to the bowl. Continue mixing on speed 2 until the add-ins are evenly distributed throughout the dough. Cover and let rest 30 minutes. Do 2 sets of folds at 30 minute intervals, then do two sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minutes intervals. Let rise for another hour or so until you see lots of small irregular bubbles through the wall of your container. The dough should have risen about 30% and be quite billowy. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~800g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the top of the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle rice flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons, cover, let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes. Internal temperature should be 205F or more. They smell awesome! My streamlined process doesn’t look like it impacted the oven spring negatively. Crumb when we cut into one!
This was the result of a whatever-I-had-in-the-pantry + I-need-a-good-camping-loaf. It was so good I decided to put it on here. It went something like this: 329 g King Arthur AP flour 174 g King Arthur White Whole Wheat 42 g King Arthur Bread Flour 260 g Local Stone-Ground Spelt, 60 sift (From Migrash Farm in Baltimore County, MD!) 336 g Flying Dog Gonzo Imperial Porter, 10% ABV 219 g H20, warm-ish 330 g medium-ripe levain (~100% hydration, mostly local wholegrain stone-ground rye, also from Migrash, + a little KA bread flour) 2 metric handfuls of walnuts, chopped 1 Tablespoon + 1 teaspoon coarse kosher salt I did a ~4 hour Autolyse with the flour, the beer, and the water while the levain was doing its thing. Mixed, performed 5 or 6 stretch and folds, then let sit over night for a total of about 12 hours for the bulk ferment. Divided, shaped, and threw into loaf pans. ~3 hour proof, Slashed and threw in the oven at 450 for about 40 mins. Supple, sweet, tangy, nutty, robust. Perfect. Each bite reminds me of the outdoors. Can't wait to take it camping!
Two 260 g loaves, whole wheat sourdough, one autolysed, one mixed all together at beginning with 1% diastolic malt. I liked the first one better for its larger crumb, deeper color, and a bit more tang. But then again, who likes apples and who likes oranges?
This is a 45% rye bread made with fresh milled rye sifted so it's close to a medium grind rye flour.  The ricotta cheese resulted in a nice moist crumb and the onions just go perfect with rye of course.  I added a little balsamic vinegar which added a little sweetness. The flavor was perfect in this one with a nice sour tang perfect for a pastrami or corned beef sandwich. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. This bread came out fantastic.  The crumb was nice and moist and open just enough to make a perfect pastrami sandwich with some melted cheese and Thousand Island dressing. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, grits, potatoes, olive oil, and salt and mix on low for 4 minutes.  You should end up with a cohesive dough that is slightly tacky but very manageable.  Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
There are only two places left on this course https://www.artisan-bread-school.com/course/five-day-course-in-lyman-maine-usa-october-2019/. The next course in the USA will be in late 2020.
Been baking so many breads with lots of add ins, back to basic but keeping my new favorite wheat germ parmesan crust. I got a new lame finally, oh it made a world of a difference! Cutting through dough like butter, I'll so try the double slash again Nothing beats the 50% einkorn in the whole grain hearty department. But this is way cheaper and perfect for sandwiches:)
Lucy was thrilled to make 2 breads in one week for a change and she really came up with a dusey too - a  Lebanese, Greek, Italian and Mexican Focaccia. This one was made with 10 g of half year old NMNF rye starter used to make a 10% pre-fermented whole rye levain at 100% hydration that was retarded for 24 hours. After mixing in the Kroger dough flour, a clove of minced garlic, some really thick Lebanese Lebneh, enough water to make an overall 72% hydration and 2% Pink Himalayan sea salt, we did 125 slap and folds followed by 3 sets of stretch and folds all on 30 minute intervals.  Total flour was 520 grams including the levain. After a 30 minute rest we shaped it onto a ball and put it into an oiled stainless steel bowel and covered it in plastic wrap for a 120 hour retard  yep 5 whole days. We let it sit for an hour and half on the counter before stretching it a couple 3 times into a PAM sprayed jelly roll pan.  Then we dimpled it with our finger tips and left  it sit fir a half an hour. We sprinkled on a tablespoon each of dried oregano and rosemary and then crushed the last of the home grown cherry tomatoes by hand over the top.  Lucy found them in the back of the fridge where they have been waiting to be used for something interesting. Rockfish Baha Tacos Then we put on 4 different kinds of olives, half black and half green from Greece, Italy, Lebanon and Mexico.  Then we grated on some Italian Parmesan and drizzled on some olive oil also from Italy. Bake Day Breakfast We seamed it with Mega Steam for 8 minutes at 450 F then took it out and spread in the 4 Mexican shredded cheese fairly thin and put it back in the dry oven at 425 F convection for about 15 more minutes. Indian Chicken and Veggie Curry When it came out we garnished with Thai Basil.  We cut it with a pizza wheel and u=it was crisp on the bottom and soft on top. It was great as it was fir sure but with some fresh Mozzarella, smoked sausage and pepperoni, spicy pizza sauce, mushrooms red bell peppers and onions, this would make a nice Pan Pizza that Chicago would be proud of. I could tell you how great this will b e for lunch tomorrow's sandwich with Lucy's home made pork, beef, lamb gyro meat and Tzadziki sauce but I haven't made it yet and it might not happen
I used the Honey Spelt Oat recipe from Sourdough by Sarah Owens. I followed her ingredients exactly, except I swapped out the spelt for whole wheat. The loaves in her book are a little small for my liking, but given my poor prior attempts with this recipe, I was happy to make less dough. I used slightly lower hydration than in prior attempts, but the main difference in process was not including oats in the autolyse. Something about doing a long autolyse that included the oat soaker just destroyed the gluten structure for me and turned the final dough into a stringy mess. I was also very nervous about over proofing the dough based on prior results, so I let the bulk go only 3 hours (versus 4 the day before). Glad I finally figured out (I think) the source of my porridge bread sorrows! If it tastes as good as it looks I'll definitely make this again (plus I have 9lbs of oats)! Next time I think I won't do an autolyse of flour + water and instead do a very short (20 min) autolyse with everything but the salt. I'll make this change because there wasn't enough water without the soaker so the autolyse created hard bits.
It’s been quite a while since I posted except for the CB earlier this week.  I pulled my starter out of the fridge on Sunday and did one refresh. Then 9:15 pm mixed the levain 9 g starter + 44 g water + 44 g flour and left on the bench over night. Monday am popped it in the microwave to warm up as room temp was only 12°C, brrrrr. once it was nice and bubbly mixed final dough 335 g bread flour + 6 g gluten flour 94 g Durum 60 g freshly milled whole wheat 37 g freshly milled spelt 360 g water. brief mix by hand followed by 100 SLAFs.  Added salt and an additional 10 g water followed by 120 SLAFs. Dough left to bulk ferment. After 45 minutes I did 1 set of coil folds  then 2 more an hour apart.  It was not warm so last hour or so the BF was done in microwave with door cracked open.  Once I had 30% increase in volume and bubbles were visible with a slight domed look I divided dough into 2 x 550 g loaves, pre shaped and rested for 30 minutes.  At 7:15 pm I decided dough was ready so baked in preheated DO for 15 minutes at 430°c fan with lid on and 15 minutes lid off. Crumb shot It is good to bake again.  happy baking everyone Leslie
This is the recipe I use as my "Go to" for WW sandwich bread. The recipe belongs to Jani Boys but I added the Ground Flax seed as well as the vital gluten and dough enhancer (this gives my bread not only vitamin C but keeps my bread fresher on the countertop. This bread can be frozen for up to a month by putting a paper towel over the top of the cooled loaf then put into a large plastic bag like a gallon size Ziplock. SOFT 100% WHOLE WHEAT SANDWICH BREAD Author: Jami Boys  https://anoregoncottage.com/whole-wheat-sandwich-bread-101/ ★★★★★ An easy, soft 100% whole wheat sandwich bread with only 1 rise that will free you from buying loaves at the store! Prep Time: 1 hour 30 mins Cook Time: 30 mins Total Time: 2 hours ·      Notes from BJD: I used 2 1/2 cups KA bread flour 12% Protein with 4 c KA WW 14% protein flour. ·      I used all the optional; vital gluten, dough conditioner & flax seed. Her original didn’t have these and it makes a very nice soft bread as well. Yield: 2 loaves INGREDIENTS ·      6 to 6-1/2 cups whole wheat flour (ww regular, ww bread, or white whole wheat all work great) ·      2–1/2 cups warm water (between 105–110 degrees) ·      1–1/2 tablespoons instant active dry yeast (not rapid rise) – regular active dry yeast can be used as well ·      1/3 cup honey ·      1/3 cup oil ·      2–1/2 teaspoons salt ·   1-1/2 tablespoons vital wheat gluten- OPTIONAL ·      1-1/2 tablespoon Dough Enhancer- OPTIONAL ·      1/2 c ground Flax seed (optional) INSTRUCTIONS 1.    Combine water, yeast and 2 cups of the flour in a mixing bowl. Set aside to sponge for 15-20 minutes, until risen and bubbly (warmer weather takes 15 min, cooler temps usually needs 20). 2.    Add honey, oil, salt, (gluten, if using), and 4 cups of flour. Mix until dough starts to clean sides of bowl. Change to dough hook (or turn out to knead by hand), (No need to change to dough hook if using the Bosch mixer), and knead 6 to 7 minutes (10 by hand). Add only a few tablespoons of flour at a time if dough sticks to sides, being careful not to add too much. 3.    Form into two loaves and place in greased 9×5″ pans ( I use 803g of dough per loaf in my 9x5 pans). Allow to rise in a warm place for about  40-60 minutes, or 15-30 min. longer if needed to reach 1/2 to 1-inch above pans (i.e., cold kitchens may need the longer time). Preheat oven to 350 degrees ten minutes before rising time is done. 4.    Bake for 30 minutes, rotating halfway through if needed. 5.    Immediately remove from pans to cool on a rack. Allow to completely cool before slicing. NUTRITION   Serving Size: 1 Slice ·      Calories: 110 ·      Sugar: 2.8g ·      Sodium: 136mg ·      Fat: 2.4g ·      Saturated Fat: 0.3g ·      Carbohydrates: 19.7g ·      Fiber: 0.7g ·      Protein: 2.4g ·      Cholesterol: 0mg
My second bake of the Swiss Farmhouse Bread. This time I was able to source organic raisins and make the raisin yeast water successfully.  My first attempt at yeast water failed due to impurities on the raisins, so I resorted to making the yeast water using kumquats and honey. This time I made the raisin yeast water using organic raisins and was successful. I also changed the container setup using an airlock lid and a cling film layer in contact with the water. I observed the development daily and on the sixth day, the bubbles were very active. Setup day 1 Day 6 - ready for build 1
A stalk of Marquis heritage wheat still standing tall in the field after last week's harvest.  The picture is courtesy of Cedar Isle Farm - Organic Grains CSA, Agassiz, BC.  The Marquis and soft spring wheat were harvested last week just before a rare late summer rain storm passed through the valley. This wheat was in short supply last year but after a successful growing season and harvest the farm will be offering it again this year to all the *CSA members....very good news, happy baking ahead! *Community Supported Agriculture
I tried to make Shiao-Ping's recipe for chocolate sourdough and I added walnuts and 160g chocolate stout to replace sone of the water. This recipe had a 37% starter % inoculation so I was really curious about how it would work. It smells amazing, but the oven spring was a little underwhelming. In the fridge, the dough kind of cracked which is something I hadn't experienced before. I think in part it was because the dough was lower hydration and much stiffer than I'm used to, but also maybe it was a sign of overproofing - not sure. I think I made  a mistake when incorporating the chocolate and walnuts during lamination is I ended up tearing the gluten. Next time I would probably use slap and fold to add the chocolate and really develop the dough. I feel like this dough could have used even more mixing/gluten development as the cocoa powder really impedes the process. The crumb is definitely different - a bit crumbly and moist in parts although I'm pretty sure it's fully baked. The taste is very good, but it's more like cake than bread. At first I thought it was overproofed, but now I think that maybe there just wasn't enough gluten development and that I did some damage during lamination. What do you think my looking at the crumb? Fun to try something new! This was also my first time using coil folds and I enjoyed it.
I used the Smoky Chili Sourdough recipe from Sarah Owens, but added 2 tbsp tomato paste and 180g of chocolate stout to replace some of the water content. The dough was great to work with. I got a bit distracted trying to work 2 recipes at once so I ended up shaping earlier than I had intended. I usually put the loaves right in the fridge after shaping, but because the bulk was on the short side I left the dough out for about 45 minutes before putting it in the fridge. Great oven spring although my attempts at new scoring methods were funky. This was my first time using T85 flour for 80% of the loaf and resulted in a denser crumb. These loaves were 75% hydration and 80% high-extraction T85 flour and 20% whole wheat.
For one 750 g loaf Levain Build
281 g all purpose flour 19 g sugar 5 g salt 281 g unsalted butter, 2.5 sticks cold not frozen 144 g cold tap water FOR THE FILLING:
Hi All, I’ve just dived into the world of baking naturally leavened bread and I’m just a tiny bit obsessed. I’ve been drooling over my friend’s instagram pictures for the past couple of years. (He’s a chef in Toronto/MTL who bakes sourdough weekly). Last week my sister brought me some of his starter. Which was handed to him from another chef, who got it from his grandmother and apparently it’s very very old. So I was super excited to dive in and make some bread. My sister gave me a lesson and we used my king Arthur white bread flour with 75% hydration and I couldn’t shape figure out how to shape a wet blob of flour goo for the life of me. But it still tasted delicious and after a week of reading the perfect loaf blog almost cover to cover I was read to try again. I used the same recipe as last week but with a little less water. 38% starter, 100% bread flour, 70% water, 2.2% salt. That being said I put a lot of flour on the counter before shaping and in the basket after to avoid sticking and ripping. But I followed the method from the perfect loaf beginner bread. With the addition of using a stand mixer and mixing/kneading the dough until a windowpane could be seen after the autolyse. The dough didn’t seem to rise very much during the 5.5hours bulk in my 75 degree kitchen with 3 sets of folds 30mins apart. But shaping went well. Also, they didn’t seem to rise much in the fridge overnight.  But I was happy with the end result. Baked in my cast iron crocks at 480, 30 mins with the lid on 20 with the lid off. Hopefully, I’ll get the same or better result next week. My my only real question right now is, why do some recipes call for kneading until the windowpane  and some don’t include that step at all? (Don’t really know how to add pictures yet sorry, I’m typing from my cell phone)
I'm beginning this Danish recipe straight from Copenhagen. I just milled the wheat and rye.  Yeast water is fermenting. It also uses walnut oil and milk. We'll see how it goes.
Here in the UK right now it's a rare fine weather-public holiday combo, so it's time to reach for TFL's Jason's Quick Ciabatta recipe and open up the BBQ.  Cheers Jason http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/2984/jasons-quick-coccodrillo-ciabatta-bread
Ingredients: Directions:
I've been making the same sundried tomato cheese bread for a long time and honestly I think that's one of the best tasting bread in the world..UNTIL I saw Danni put roasted garlic in hers!! Talking about putting another one of my favorite things in my favorite bread🤤 So this time I follow my old recipe but did a few things differently: 1.added garlic slices that's been toasted slowly in the same oil that comes with the sundried tomatoes 2.Toasted the chopped up tomatoes because why not 3. Instead if chopping the tomatoes super fine and mixed in the dough to create a beautiful orange tinted dough  I kept them chunky and only did light mixing and folds! The result is amazing, lots of big chucks of sundried tomatoes, mildly garlicky, pretty wild looking bread 20190826_113812.jpg 20190826_113715.jpg I think I still prefer the look of kneading the tomatoes into the dough, but the garlic....oh the garlic will always be included in this bread in the future! SO DELICIOUS
Sourdough Pizza with balsamic olive oil marinated arugula and grape tomatoes with egg and avocados. Tonight I made two individual sized sourdough pizzas using my trusty cast iron skillet again.  These are almost the same as my last pizzas I made except i started the pizzas in the oven without the egg for two minutes, pulled it out to add the egg and then once done after a total of 8 mins topped with a few more marinated tomatoes and arugula and the avocado.  I like the creaminess of the avocado to contrast the sharpness of the balsamic vinegar and I preferred the yolk a bit less cooked which I why I shortened the cook time on the egg as described. All in all a good pizza.  Have two more doughs in the fridge that I’ll make tomorrow just not sure what to top them with yet.
Tonight’s dinner.  Again I used the Community Bake Recipe for sourdough pizza dough, thanks again to Danny and ThePieKing for the CB. I have found that the dough is even better after a 72 hour cold fermentation and that the gluten hasn’t broken down at all. I marinated Kalamata olives, sun dried tomato stuffed green olives, artichokes, grape tomatoes, and roasted red peppers in a blend of red wine vinegar, olive oil, salt, pepper and some of the marinade of the artichokes.  Directly on the crust is shaved Grana Padano cheese to protect the crust from this very wet topping combination.  Baked for 8 mins and topped with fresh basil.  Delicious. As you can see putting this low moisture cheese directly on the crust protects it from the very wet toppings leaving you with a nicely crisp crust and can hold the weight of the toppings  relatively well sort of like a Neapolitan Pizza. Benny
I had never used a recipe from The Perfect Loaf before, so I decided to try the beginner sourdough recipe. Not being able to help myself, I decided to add 16% seeds (poppy, sesame, sunflower, and pumpkin). This recipe was 78% hydration and only 7.5% starter inoculation. My loaves last weekend came it well, but different from what I expected in terms of crumb. It turns out it was because I bought locally milled half-white, also know as T85, flour and didn't fully understand its properties. My loaves were 80% T85 and 20% whole wheat, which resulted in a very high whole grain percentage. For these loaves I decided to try 48% BF, 48% T85, and 4% rye.
I made a similar version of this bread several weeks ago but gifted them to some friends.  I wanted to try baking it again and decided to sub Farro for the freshly ground Spelt.  Spelt is one of the oldest cultivated grains initially discovered in the fertile crescent of the Middle East. Grano farro is the original grain which other grains are derived. More commonly it’s now grown in Italy in the regions of Lazio, Umbria, Tuscany, the Marches, and Umbria.  It adds a nutty flavor profile and I was very happy with the final result. The purple sweet potato added a beautiful color and really makes the crumb nice and moist and flavorful.  I highly recommend you give this one a try if you can get your hand on the ingredients.  The purple sweet potato does taste very different than the standard orange version as it is not as sweet so if you decide to sub it will not taste the same.  It will still be good, but I prefer the flavor the purple potatoes imparted. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the sweet potato with 90% of the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, olive oil, salt and the balance of the water and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Below is the nice moist and colorful crumb.
Red bulgur were toasted in butter along with crushed fenugreek and caraway seeds, added about 2 Tbsp of everything seasoning too just to add another layer of flavor and texture. My first time trying out bulgur in bread, using my porridge sourdough recipe with some modifications. It's a great success! I'm very very happy with the result!! This is such a flavor and texture bomb, the fenugreek will make your house smell like heaven, the red bulgur keeps the crumb moist and slightly chewy, and the best part is the crust, incredibly thin and crispy!
Hi, just wanted to let you know that this post ended up being a little long, and rambly. It’s late here and I just want to talk about my bread :) I know when you first start out the goal should just be making a consistently decent loaf or at lease being able to repeat what you created the last time. But I’m so eager to learn, I just had to try something a little different. And after a week of watching Trevor and @fullproofbaking (sorry I don’t know her name) mix and fold and shape (they are amazing!) I had to try and make this bread with my hands. So I used the same formula I used the week before. 100% King Arthur bread flour, 70% water, 38% levain, and 2% salt and I set to work. I didn’t learn about my first mistake/lesson until after my loaf was in the oven this morning. I was reading post by fullproofbaking on how to calculate bakers percentages and realized I didn’t account for the levain. Last week when I used 527g of flour, 369 water and 200g 100% hydration starter, I actually had 72% hydration. And this week when I upped my flour to 700g, 490g water, and 250g levain (less percentage wise than last week, but all I had) I actually had 75% hydration. So this would explain why the dough was much more difficult to handle than it was last week. A side note about my Starter: I’ve named her Wilhelmina after my great grandmother. She’s almost as old as she would have been, being born sometime in the late 1800’s. Also, she’s demanding and tough. My mother hated her grandmother, apparently she would make her do chores and redo them when she wasn’t satisfied after school. Even though my great grandmother was very well off and had her own staff. Also, apparently a billboard fell off a building and hit her in the leg and she walked to the hospital without help with a broken leg when she was 85. She also lived into her late 90’s and she couldn’t have been all bad because she hid and fed people in her walls during WWII. So my tough, demanding, long lived dough is named for her. And I’ve been trying to do well by her and feed her 3-4 times before building my levain. I’m happy I discovered I could do this with very small portions. To make my dough, I mixed (by hand) all my flour and most of my water and left it on the counter (in the sun) for 2 hours. I then added the rest of the water, the salt, and my starter. Here I attempted to copy Trevor by spreading the starter over the dough and dimpling it in. I then did some kind of stretching and  folding to incorporate the ingredients as well as some of that fancy scooping/stretching motion in the bowl. (notice that I know exactly what I’m talking about :) ) I had wanted to attempt the slap and fold method but I chickened out. I did these various “mixing” motions for 10ish minutes and took a break because my arm was killing me. ( I lift weights 5 days a week but apparently I don’t have enough strength to mix dough for more than 8mins. ) After I let is rest for 15 minutes, I did another 5 mins of the scooping thing. It should be noted that I did all of this with a toddler sitting on my counter. I had to stop frequently to keep her from sticking things in the bowl, eating the dough, and trying to grab knives or run on the counter. (Mom of the year, I know ;) ) I then put the dough in a new bowl (b/c that’s what Trevor does) and covered it and left it on the counter in the sun again (not sure if this is bad?) for a 4 hour bulk. I did 4 sets of folds in the bowl 30 - 60 mins apart. Pre-shaping was disastrous with one half and went okay with the other half of the dough. So I let it rest 25 minutes and attempted to shape again. The disastrous one had spread out in a blob on the counter. But I managed to form a somewhat decent boule with it and then tightened it up a bit one it was in the towel lined bowl. Then I thought I would be fancy and make a batard with the other half... it looks so easy when Trevor and fullproof do it!!! I could watch videos of them shaping dough all day long. (I do this at night and my husband things I’m crazy) Anyway, some sort of oval was created and in the bowl it went. I also pinched it a bit tighter then too. And into the fridge for an overnight proof. This morning I preheated my oven to 500 an hour before baking and heated my crocks up too. With the lids this time. Reduced the heat to 475 and baked them 20 mins lids on, 35 no lid. This pictures above are of my “batard” or wonky log thing. Anyway, I’m still really pleased with it and it tastes amazing. All I want to do is bake more bread. I’m considering making a pan bread this weekend. I even bought some local organic whole wheat flour that I want to add to it. But my only loaf pan is 9x4.5x 3 and I’m probably going to have to do some more math to adapt someone’s recipe to fit my pan. Any tips on working with whole wheat or making sourdough pan breads? Thanks and I hope you’re having a good day! - Charlett
To the random person on the internet that clicked on my blog, Its midnight and I start my new job in 8 hours. I just quit my job a week ago. Actually I just quit 2 jobs in a month in the same field as most of the jobs on my resume- security work. I know security work. It's easy, anyone can do it and at the last job location I got paid 17 an hour to wear a suit and be a living mannequin for 6 hours a day. The bottoms of my feet hurt from standing still on a hard surface wearing the most uncomfortable dress shoes. The muscles in my leg panged with pain when I rose them too high. I tried calling Dr. Scholls to say "what the hell, man?" But the Dr was never in. So I quit. A day later I hopped on Indeed and applied to all sorts of jobs, none of them having anything related to security work. Godiva chocolatier, edible arrangements arranger, hospital jobs, and cooking jobs. Hell, I even applied and got offered an interview as a photographer on a cruise ship. I applied to two different bakeries, one was my ex-girlfriends favorite bakery. It's a well known japanese bakery. I loved their strawberry shortcake, actually it was the only thing I tried there.. And another bakery called Epi-ya boughlangery? Boughlangerie? and Patisserie. I had back to back interviews at both bakeries on the same day, so I went to kulu kulu first. The interview went horribly. Couldnt tell you why, specifically. It's just this funny little feeling I got about 3 minutes into the interview. I had already known she wasnt going to call me back for a follow up. She said she'll let me know this weekend and it's already 2412 Monday morning. But that didnt even matter because when I arrived at Epi-ya, with their grand opening banner still blowing in the wind outside, the manager's whole attitude seemed different from the natural disaster I walked into earlier. She asked me how my last interview went and I told her it went bad. She seemed genuinely interested in me. The interview went great, and she told me she was going to bring out the head baker, Mr. Sato. Sato was professional. He asked me about the stint at Pizza Hut and looked at me sort of dismissively. He knew I knew nothing about baking bread. He asked me if I was good at math, I said yes (i barely passed geometry in summer school after failing algebra 1). He asked me if i can work long hours. I said yes. He told me the starting pay is low but would increase as I get better at my craft. I told him I'm fine with that. Hell I was over the moon at this point because I knew I got the job. But I'm bad at math. I know nothing about baking. The only thing I've ever baked was cookies in the packet at the grocery store with the directions on the back. Everything at Epi-ya is made from scratch. But I loved working at Pizza Hut. I loved working with my hands, trying and successfully outdoing my coworkers as far as presentation goes. I loved getting tips from customers, the recognition of my ability to whip out amazing looking pizzas in minutes far surpassed any monetary value of the tips. I have zero confidence in myself. I expect to get fired on the first day for my incompetence But I'm not going back to security work If I'm going down, I'm going down swinging. Or rather, baking.
Here's another Egg Harbor white bread from Bernard Clayton's New Complete Book of Bread. It always turns out dynamite.  Sorry about the measurement in cups.  Haven't converted it yet. 1.5 tbl sugar 7g salt 3 cups bread flour 1 tbl butter 1/2 tbl salt 50g starter Glaze: 1 tbl milk + egg white 1 1/4 cups water [120-130f) 1. Dissolve the sugar and salt in the water. Toss the butter in. 2. Mix half the flour and yeast.  Stir in the water mixture. 3. Stir in the starter.  Stir in remaining flour. Let sit 10 minutes. 4. Under dough hook mix around 8 minutes until slightly stretchy. 5.  Cover tightly with plastic wrap. 6. After 30 minutes do a fold and turn.  Do 3 more turn and folds about 15 minutes apart. 7. On lightly floors. Floured surface shape into a ball.  Tighten up outer skin.  Then gently shape into elongated ball the length of a 9x5 loaf pan. 8. Spray loaf pan with coconut oil then place loaf inside.  Wax paper goes atop. Rise is about 40 minutes. 9. Preheat oven to 400f. Brush top with an egg/ milk mixture.  Place loaf in oven to bake around 30 minutes.  If top browns too quickly place foil on top. 10.  remove to cooling rack when internal temp is 205f+ and top is golden brown.
After what seems like forever, I finally baked yesterday.  This is a Hamelman-based 50% whole grain bread with a soaker.  Hard wheat, rye, spelt, and kamut comprised the whole grain.  I attempted to sift for a bran levain, but the sifter stopped working.  Therefore the levain was all whole grain, which at least helped somewhat. The soaker had rolled oats and kamut, toasted malted rye powder, and old bread.  I waited 45 minutes to do the first fold and it had a great balance of extensibility and strength, and after about 2.5 hours of bulk, shaping was easy.  I put them in cold storage at 11 a.m.  Later I decided I'd rather just bake them off, so at 4 I returned them to the proofer and baked at 7:30.
I had a reliable, easy starter in Pittsburgh. I have been baking sourdough bread every weekend for the past year. I just moved to Charleston SC and started a new starter with 100% fresh milled rye flour and water, the flour was purchased 1 year ago and kept in a sealed Tupperware container in a dark cabinet. The temperature in my house is 78F. It was very active the first night (which was unexpected) and continuously decreasing in activity over the week and minimally active after 7 days. It still has tiny bubbles, and smells sour, and passes the float test but does not rise whatsoever. I read Debra’s winks blog about bacteria being the cause that could be deceiving as yeast in the beginning. If this is the case can I still fix it? Start over?  I’ve tried it twice and the same thing happened. I’ve used purified water both times. What the heck is happening!? Any thoughts would be appreciated. I’m so frustrated I miss baking. Thanks, Jenny
I post on rare occasions and mainly follow everyone's great work on this site. I need help achieving the last 5% of the tartine country loaf-- a good interior crumb. Or maybe it's more like 50% of the importance haha. Currently, my crumb is very uneven where some areas are chewy, some are light and airy, and other areas have too much bubbly airholes. I was following the Tartine loaf recipe pretty religiously but I was getting even worse interior crumb than what I'm getting now. The big difference now is i'm first mixing in a stand mixer until I get a windowpane effect and no autolyse. I've tweaked my approach to include some tartine elements and other elements similar to this method: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2FVfJTGpXnU My ingredients are: In terms of maintenance: My current approach is as follows: Again, my biggest issue is having an uneven interior crumb where some spots are airy and perfect while a majority of other spots are chewy and too dense/doughy. Here are some pictures of one of my recent, more successful bakes: Thank you for considering to add your expertise and input! Much appreciated TFL people!
This was inspired by Rushuyama's beautiful Fig & Walnut multigrain posted a few years ago here. I scaled the ingredients to 70% of the original to make one larger loaf. I didn't have any spelt on hand (we love spelt and it disappears) so subbed in some Kamut, used freshly and finely ground durum instead of semolina, and I added chopped date along with the chopped figs, since I didn't have enough of the latter. The durum, Kamut, and Red Fife were all freshly ground. This is my second attempt at this loaf; first version (a boule) came out flattened on top owing to a mishap when flipping the dough from banneton to parchment lined peel. I flipped it without first removing the shower-cap cover on the banneton. D'ough! Had to then unflip it, then remove the cap, and re-flip it. The top of the dough stuck to the plastic. [This was a new mistake for me; hopefully I won't make it again!]. The bread was tasty, however. This time I remembered to remove the plastic cover. BUT....when I opened the oven to remove the pre-heated oblong clay baker, gobs of smoke *billowed* out, choking me and setting off the smoke alarms. My husband had made pizza earlier that evening and been a little too enthusiastic with the sauce and cheese, which had overflowed onto the racks and bottom of the oven. There was *no* way I could bake with the oven in that condition. Unfortunately, I had already flipped the dough onto parchment and scored it. Again, there was unflipping and reflipping of the dough back into, then out of, then back into the banneton as I pondered my options. Much swearing and cursing ensued, in my head anyway. It all seemed to be a disaster, one comprised of high quality, freshly ground ingredients. Long story short, my husband, a nurse, recognized my distress, sprang into action, scraped off the smoking gunk, reheated the oven and baker, and 20 minutes later I was able to bake the loaf. The results are excellent. Note: I proofed the loaf on the counter for 45 minutes, then put it into the fridge for another 5 or so hours. I then baked it at 475 F in a pre-heated, covered clay baker for 30 mins, and at 450 degrees for 12 mins w/cover off. My version based on the original:
I’m sorry about posting another Beginner’s Sourdough loaf but I wanted to repeat it a few more times to see if I am getting any more consistent results.  I reduced the hydration by 20 gms when mixing to try to account for water added while doing coil folds etc.  I found that the dough was quite stiff despite a several hour autolyze, I think this was the reduced hydration unless I actually reduced by even more than I thought.  The lower hydration made slap and folds very hard.  As more water was used with coil folds the dough gradually seemed to be a bit more of what I was used to when bulk fermenting sourdough. I’m hoping that I watched fermentation better this time so that this isn’t underfermented as the last one seemed to be.  Shaping went quite well, this is likely in part because of the reduced hydration but also this time I used much less flour, a lot less actually.
Hello TFLers! I haven't posted for a long time because I was very busy. I just made it through my first year of practicing the noble profession of teaching so to celebrate it, I made a sourdough brioche. 100% sourdough, made with whole eggs and about 70% butter then baked in ensaymada style in ensaymada tins. I wish I have made a brioche à tête shape too given shape of the tins.Though simpler to make, it was still a labor of love; it took 36 hours from start to finish! The dough was wetter and richer in butter; I only kneaded by hand and it feels like baba dough which is usually made in a stand mixer. It was really worth it, so rich yet so light! Crust was crisp and flaky and the crumb was so soft and light.The crumb was very shreddy and difficult to cut. I was lazy to get my serrated knife that's why crumb appears to be rough and non-uniform. I also used store-bought eggs (would you believe it? Our hens seldom lay eggs these days.) so it didn't have the nice color that I'm used to. Fragrant and so buttery with a pronounced tang. It's less rich than my ensaymada but if you top this with butter, sugar and cheese; it will be a good ensaymada too. Not too sweet too because of less sugar and the absence of it in the topping. I chose to leave it plain and just eat with jam instead.Served it with traditional hot chocolate just like the traditional ensaymada pairing. Perfect for this rainy day!I hoped you enjoyed this post! See you next time!
My very first attempt to make a Hokaido milk bread, but unsweetened. I added some dried rosemary for the aroma, and a little olive oil instead of butter. I didn't use eggs either. The crumb is soft, but not very open, much more akin to a 'normal' sourdough. Has anyone tried a savoury version of milk bread?
Back to baking after 3 weeks off. I made David’s bread following his recipe exactly aside from fresh milled flour and the addition of 30 g yogurt. Here is the link: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/59782/todays-bake-3312019#comment-435200
Objective: Use up a can of pumpkin that's been in the pantry since last year's frenzy of fall baking, ha. Levain: 50g refrigerated starter, 100 g water, 100 g AP, overnight at RT (60s nowadays) Main dough: 500g flour, 200g water (held back about 30g for the salt) 125g canned pumpkin. Autolyse for ~30 mins. Incorporate 10g salt with pinch and squeeze. One turn every 45 mins or so, or when I remembered for about 4 hours. Shaped and put into an oiled bowl (no bannetons, sigh) for a ~16 hr retard. Incorporated about a tablespoon of fresh thyme on the last 2 turns. Decorated with a few rolled oat flakes- if I'd thought ahead I would have had pepitas haha Baked at 450 in dutch oven, 25 lid on/20 off after a 1 hr hold at 75 degF. Measured internal temp at 200+ after baking. Flavor: Good, but like a standard sourdough with thyme. No discernable pumpkin flavor, unfortunately. Might have to try a more strongly flavored/dryer? winter squash (I'm partial to kabocha) and see what happens!
I had planned on making a yeast water bread with a YW I made using crab apples from my parents' yard. I ended up going away for the weekend, which meant my YW build of 100g YW and 160g bread flour got left on the counter for 26 hours. I didn't think I could use it to make bread at that point so I decided to make a hybrid babka recipe. I used 150g T85, 350g BF, 200g of my YW build, and about 40g of unfed sourdough starter along with 1/2 tsp of active yeast (also 95g sugar, 240g milk, and 2 eggs). I pretty much followed the usual recipe from SmittenKitchen otherwise. The recipe I used before my sourdough starter days uses 2 tsp of commercial yeast so this hybrid tried to reduce the commercial yeast by 75% and reduce the waste from my abandoned YW build. I had no idea if it would work, but I think it looks good! Next time I want to try the full sourdough babka recipe from Artisan Bryan. For this bake I did an initial rise of 3 hours followed by shaping in the tin and an overnight rise in the fridge. I let the bread sit out at room temp before baking at 375 for about an hour. I put a simple syrup glaze on the top right out of the oven.
We have a vintage bread mixer Touquoise but no motor.  I find 534 marked on bottom is there a market for this or does it become metal scrap.
moves well by hand not motor.  Bowl in good condition. Markings underneath say 543 some part that is unreadable. Im not sure how this works so I am sending my email address.  edmatthias@msn.com
The following are links to our Community Bakes
Another summer gone, and another summer away from baking.  Prior to taking my bake break, I mentioned to my Barcelona friends that upon return, I would also return to complete some unfinished tritordeum business.  That being to use the grain in a ciabatta.  My recent go-to ciabatta formula is a modified version of Scott MeGee’s biga based dough. Two runs, two types of tritordeum used.  Each was a mix of 50/50 AP/tritordeum, employing the Hamelman-like AP levain at 125% hydration.  With bassinage and 3% olive oil, the overall hydration of the total dough stands at 79%.  In both cases, the water and the levain are kept refrigerated until mix time, owing to the mixing friction of my old Kitchen Aid planetary mixer raising the temperature as it developed the dough. As with other ciabatte formula mixes, as the speed of the mechanical mixer increases, I seek two distinct signs that the dough is sufficiently developed.  Not only do I listen for the slapping sound of the dough against the sides of the mixing bowl, but I also wait to see the dough being intermittently picked up off the bowl onto the dough hook and then re-deposited onto the bowl.  Once these two qualifications are met, the dough has gained sufficient strength, and the mix is over. The first bake used the 'T150’ flour.  The result was a relatively handsome set of loaves although the crumb, while tasty, left a lot to be desired as far as open structure - especially for a ciabatta.  I will attribute this to three culprits.  1) Tritordeum is referred to as a low gluten flour in the online literature, 2) the ‘T150’ is akin to whole wheat flour, which will “consume” more of the hydration and also contribute to a tighter crumb, and 3) to my being away from the baking craft for a few months and therefore this served as my refresher bake.  I’ll pretty much dismiss the last point as I’ve stepped away before and found little to no degradation in my skill set. The second bake was with the ‘T65’ tritordeum, and I had just enough of that flour to fashion two 500g loaves before my store of the grain was depleted.  On this run, one can see that the crumb is more open and fairly close to when I use 100% KA AP flour at ~11.7% protein.  I also decided to allow for a rest time of 20 minutes between the initial incorporation of water and the final mix. In both cases the shaping was decent, but fell short of being as consistent as I would like.  The girth of the loaves also didn't equal what I’ve produced before with all AP flour - the barrel just wasn’t big enough in circumference. My opinion is that while the ’T150’ version creates a pleasing and tasty bread, it would be hard pressed to pass muster as a ciabatta from the crumb alone and delivered a heavy and dense character to the bread.  I would not recommend this as a ciabatta bread.  It was quite tasty - just don’t sell it as a ciabatta to avoid disappointment. The ’T65’ version has more of the ciabatta open crumb characteristic with a crumb that is open enough for what one might expect from a ciabatta at the lower end of the hydration scale.  And I think that this version could very easily please most palates and not disappoint when presented as a ciabatta. This was just furthering my experimentation and knowledge of the grain itself and what it potentially can and cannot do well.  And I feel that the 'T65' version holds up quite well to an AP flour with the added benefits and enhanced flavor profile of the tritordeum grain. In each run all loaves were ~500g. 'T150' Tritordeum 'T65' Tritordeum And for comparison, here is what the all AP version of this bread looked like from two previous bakes...
I made one HUGE loaf with sauteed shallots and cornmeal porridge (50g of cornmeal and 235g of liquid). Excluding the cornmeal porridge, this loaf was 76% hydration, but with the cornmeal it was an extremely wet dough and a bit tough to handle, but the coil folds and lamination added a lot of strength. The hydration definitely pushed my limits! Final dough: I had a rough time scoring today, but the bread tastes great and the crumb is extremely moist. I'll definitely be making this one again. I did a 4 hour bulk (4x coil folds and one lamination) followed by 10 hours in the fridge.
I was inspired by Janet Cook's gorgeous bake back in 2013 and decided to give it a go. I used my Farmer Ground Flour high-extraction bread flour. The hydration of this loaf is 80%. They smell absolutely amazing! I didn't pre-soak the poppy seeds so the dough felt pretty dry for 80% hydration and I might increase the water slightly next time. I think the crumb is decent for 100% T85. Final dough:
It was time to throw some seeds into some bread again. I checked out my previous methods on adding seeds and decided to go with a dry seed addition rather than using a soaker. It seems that I got a more open crumb doing this rather than doing the soaker. Hopefully, this holds true. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Seed Add-ins 70 g Sunflower seeds 50 g Sesame seeds (I used half black and half white) 50 g freshly ground flax seeds 30 g Amaranth seeds 30 g Buckwheat groats 15 g Millet seeds 15 g Hemp hearts Main dough 600 g strong baker’s unbleached flour 150 g wholegrain Durum flour 150 g wholegrain Kamut flour 100 g wholegrain Rye flour 800 g water 23 g Pink Himalayan salt 30 g plain yogurt 250 g levain (Procedure in recipe) Extra wholegrain rye flour for levain builds Mid afternoon the day before: Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g of wholegrain rye flour. Let rise in a warm place. I use homemilled flour so if you are doing the same, measure out the stated amount for each type of flour in berries or grain, and mill it on the finest setting of your home mill. If buying flour, get the freshest that you can and try to ensure that it is wholegrain. By the way, if you can’t get Durum flour or Kamut flour, they can be replaced with whole wheat flour. You could even sub in Spelt flour for either the Durum or the Kamut. Place the required amounts of the wholegrain flours in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. Cover and set aside. The night before: Toast all the seeds except for the ground flax either in the oven or in a dry frying pan until fragrant. Be careful not to burn them. Cool, add the ground flax, and set aside. Before going to bed, feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g of wholegrain rye flour. Let that rest in a warm spot overnight. Dough making day: Feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of strong baker’s flour and let rise until double in a warm spot. This took 6 hours. A couple of hours before the levain is ready, mix the water with the flour, and mix on speed 1 until all the flour has been hydrated. Let this autolyse until the Levain has doubled. Once the levain is ready, add the salt, the yogurt and the levain to the bowl. Mix on speed one for a minute or two to integrate everything, then mix on speed 2 for 9 minutes. Add the toasted seeds and mix on speed 2 until they are evenly distributed. This should only take a minute or two. Remove dough from bowl and place in a covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes. Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~780g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the top of the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle rice flour, then extra sunflower seeds and sesame seeds in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. Oven spring was not too bad for a dough with that many seeds in it.
It’s my first blog post here, I’ve asked a few questions before and lurked a lot but thought I’d post a loaf for the first time! Here’s a simple 50% whole-wheat from the weekend. The wheat is an organic/biodynamic milling wheat from Four Leaf in South Australia and was milled at home on my Retsel Mil-Rite. The other 50% is an organic bakers flour. The levain was fed 1:3:3, with a blend of fresh milled rye and organic bakers flour and left to ferment for ~4hours. The wheat (200g) was milled and autolysed with the BF (200g) for two hours at ~83% hydration. 80g levain was added and mixed. At this point the dough felt a little stiff still, so I added some more water, I’m not sure exactly how much though. 30 mins later, 8g salt was added and mixed through. I did two sets of coil folds, one 30mins after the salt was added and another one 30mins after that. The dough was allowed to bulk for around 3hours more. I turned out the dough and pre rounded it on the bench. I let it rest uncovered for 30mins before shaping it into a batard. This was a very simple shaping, I just did a letter fold and then placed it in the proofing basket. It was allowed to proof at room temp for 30mins before being placed in the fridge for 12hours. Baked in a preheated combo cooked at ~240c (not sure how accurate my oven is). First 20mins of bake was covered and next 20mins uncovered. I'll post a picture of the crumb when I slice into it :)
Is it safe to use a pizza stone that was left in the oven after the self cleaning process? It now looks like new, but I'm not sure it is safe you use.
Been a while since last blog, bread flour hasn't been on sale for a while, So I've been baking breads with more hearty whole grains😊 Toasted steel cut oat, rosemary and 4 grain combo: This one is bomb, the rosemary really complements the sweet oats. As always, I prefer steel cut oats rather than rolled oats. Next one is Date sweeten rye chocolate sourdough, with cranberries, peanut butter and peanut butter chips!! I've got a huge box of deglet nour dates so I decided to blend in a whole 100g of dates with water to make this dough, you can see the red hue coming through. Super chocolatey, fruity and peanuty, it's a real treat. Last one is today's breakfast seeded spelt bread: This is specifically made and sliced to go with the avocados we got during the weekend
a friend told me of this flour available for a brief time at our local supermarket Well, another friend made a cakey slice and had real trouble and found the mixture much too wet.  so I decided to proceed with caution.  Hold back some water and bake 2 loaves (600 g each) side by side - one with flour as it and one with 1% added gluten.  I just made standard 1:2:3 doughs. so here are the doughs at end of mix - autolyse 30 minutes, 100 SLAFs, add salt then another 120 SLAFs. dough 1 il Molino flour only Initially held back 25 g water but added 10 g back to dough and the balance with the salt.  After autolyse dough looked quite unorganised but through the SLAFs became a lovely dough that  lovely smooth and non sticky. dough 2 - il Molino + 1% gluten The same process and added all the water. This dough was more extensible , softer and had more bubbles. Both doughs had 4 sets of coil folds at 45 minute intervals then preshaped and rested for 30 minutes. Final shaping was 6 hours after mixing. dough 1 on left, dough 2 on the right Dough was left to proof and this took 1 hour 45 minutes and I then refrigerated dough for another hour 15 minutes (was dinner time) then both baked in preheated (@ 250°c) DOs for 15 mins lid on, 15 mins lid off at 230°c fan. crumb shot dough 1 dough 2 This flour made lovely dough and I am really glad I bought a couple of bags, one of which I have stored in the freezer. I am in process of moving so baking has to wait! Does any one else know this Italian flour? I have never seen this flour before abut hope I can get it in future. I usually add 1% gluten but this flour alone was great! Leslie
I was poking around in the back of the drinks cupboard, as you do, and came across this bottle of Saltaire Triple Chocoholic stout, a long forgotten thoughtful gift from Jane, my daughter, It seemed a pity to drink it all at once when I could enjoy it for a lot longer, one slice at a time, so it became the large part of the liquid in a pair of loaves of 40% wholewheat bread. Here's the breakdown: Marriage's strong white flour           720g      60% Home milled Skyfall wheat              480g      40% Saltaire Triple Chocoholic stout      470g       42% Water                                               400g      33% Salt                                                    24g         2% Levain @ 100% hyd.                       240g       20% Final hydration including levain                       75%. Flour in levain was 50% each of Strong white and whole grain. The triple choc stout should have been 500g but I couldn't resist having a swig. Day 1   Levain build.  8am      5g+10+10 1pm     25g+30+30 6pm     85g+83+83      Into fridge @ 11pm All flour water and salt mixed together@ 10pm and into fridge at 11pm. Day 2     8am    Autolyse and levain out of fridge to warm to room temp. 12.30pm  Levain added to dough and mixed in. Bulk ferment completed after 5hrs. including five stretch and folds in first 2 1/2 hours. 5.30pm  dough divided.  6pm  final shape and into fridge @ 6.30pm. Day 3    12 noon  Dough baked in dutch oven straight from fridge. So thank you Jane, the bread is delicious and any time you feel the urge to buy your old dad some more chocoholic stout, don't resist!
After a not so successful chocolate loaf, I tried to copy the Full Proof baking recipe, but added chestnuts, doubled the chocolate chips, and replaced 30g of water with yeast water. I went the easy route and did just one dough, and not dough A&B as the recipe suggests. This loaf was 78% hydration, 90% bread flour, and 10% fresh ground wheat.
Definitely not my most attractive bread! This bread was 85% hydration, with 35% T85, 10% rye (never done this before), and 55% bread flour. I added 150g of toasted chopped walnuts which was a lot for my 750g of dough to handle. I did a 12% starter inoculation, but also added 50g of yeast water to the dough. I'm not sure if adding the yeast water really made a difference or not. I see that the loaf split a bit on the side which I haven't had happen before. I don't know if this is because of a proofing issue or because the dough wasn't shaped/sealed tightly enough. This was my first time making a batard shaped loaf.
Failed but not too bad, I forgot to do the last fold! So instead of folding it and let ferment for 1.5 hr, I let that ferment for a whole 2hr15 mins....oops....Dough was very slack at the end of the bulk, luckily I was still able to stitch it up.
Hi, I am new to this site.  Just took these beauties out of the oven.  Baking SD now for 5 months with my own starter.  Wonderful website!!!
While looking through the kitchen pantry for inspiration, I came across a bag of Wild Blend Rice made by Lundberg. So I log in to The Fresh Loaf looking for a recipe that uses rice and onions. What do I find? A recipe that I created last November using those very ingredients! 🤦‍♀️Of course, in this version, I had to tweak a few ingredients and the method. I also changed my usual timing of the Levain due to a family birthday party. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Dough: 700 g strong bakers unbleached flour 200 g fresh milled Kamut 100 g fresh milled Einkorn 85 g dry Lundberg Wild Blend Rice (~240 g cooked) 20 g dehydrated onions flakes 700 g water 30 g yogurt 50 g honey 24 g salt 250 g of 3 stage 100% hydration levain (procedure below) Rye flour (or any other wholegrain flour) to feed the levain Two mornings before: Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g of wholegrain rye flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: Feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g of wholegrain rye flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of strong baker’s flour and let rise until doubled (about 6 hours). Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: I use homemilled flour so if you are doing the same, measure out the stated amount for each type of flour in berries or grain, and mill it on the finest setting of your home mill. If buying flour, get the freshest that you can and try to ensure that it is wholegrain. Place the required amounts of the wholegrain flours in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. Cover and set aside. Cook the rice in plenty of boiling water until tender. Drain, add the dehydrated onions, mix well, and refrigerate overnight. Dough making day: When you get up, take the rice and the levain out of the fridge to warm up before being used in the dough. Using a stand mixer, mix the water with the flour, and mix on speed 1 until all the flour has been hydrated. Let this autolyse for a couple of hours. Once the autolyse is done, add the salt, the yogurt, the honey, and the levain to the bowl. Mix on speed one for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on speed 2 for 9 minutes. Add the cooked rice and onions to the mixing bowl, and mix on speed 2 until they are evenly distributed. This should only take a minute or two. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~775 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the top of the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle a  mix of rice and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. These went into the fridge at 4 pm. I got up at 5 am to bake these due to another family commitment (photo shoot at the barn). I don’t usually do early mornings. I think I’m dying!
I am still working on my skills with sourdough, having had some recent success I thought I see if I can replicate that success.  With this bake I also thought I’d try shaping using a spritz of water on the counter and my hands, unfortunately that didn’t go so well.  I’m not sure why it didn’t work, perhaps I used too much water, that is the most likely cause.  After the shaping didn’t go well with water, I let the blob rest and then reshaped using flour, this went a bit better but not as good as my previous bake. Same formula as before except 78% not counting any water added during coil folding so probably even higher. I think that some of the huge spaces in the crumb are from my shaping issues, as the slices of bread further out from the center have a nice crumb structure.  The crumb wasn’t wet or gummy at all and the bread tasted good with a slight sour tang which tasted great with the curry tomato poached cod that I made to go with this.  I do plan to bake this again and next time will reduce the hydration a bit and I’m hoping for better results again.  Sorry about posting this same recipe but I like to document my progress even if it feels like two steps back sometimes.  All good though as it will always be a learning process.  Fortunately we like the flavour and texture of this bread. Benny
Well a year and a half into my pie baking “career” I’ve finally made my first apple pie.  I know a lot of people love apple pie, but I hate peeling apples and have no space for a dedicated apple peeler in my apartment kitchen.  However, this apple pie turned out so well I might have to make room. I followed the Bravetart Apple Pie recipe almost exactly and overall it turned out well.  I used once again the all butter crust recipe from Bravetart however, this time I subbed 40 g of the water for 40 g of vodka to see if it would make the pastry a touch more tender. The mistake I made with the filling was that I didn’t leave it out at room temperature for 3 hours to macerate.  The idea being that the macerating fruit would not only give up some of its sweet juices but also that the fruit would shrink so that when baked one wouldn’t be left with a large air gap between the top crust and the fruit.  Unfortunately I didn’t follow that part of the recipe, instead focused in on the line that red it can be kept in the fridge for up to 8 hours.  So after mixing the apple, sugar and spices in a ziplock bag I immediately put it all in the fridge and planned to get up early enough to bake it the next morning.  So I had more of an air gap than I would have liked to have. Overall the Bravetart recipe is excellent, despite the large amount of juices apple release (Granny Smith in this case) the pie wasn’t runny at all and the Granny Smith stayed in their sliced form with a pleasing amount of bite left to them. One new thing I had this time was a baking iron.  With the pie baking on a cookie try and then on the preheated baking iron on the lowest rake, the bottom crust was wonderfully browned and crisp, no soggy bottom anywhere.  Again this was remarkable to me because there was at least a cup of juices after the overnight refrigerated mace ration process.  The baking iron isn’t an amazing tool for baking pies! Oh, I think that the extra 40 g of Vodka did make this pasty a bit more tender, but I’ll need to make it again the same way to know for sure.  I was also more careful not to knead this pasty too much when forming it too so that might have made the difference.
I'd been warehousing Abel Sierra's post of pan de cristal for forever.  But no more.  My first attempt 2 days ago taught me a few things about a few things, and the results, while okay, were tasty but nothing more to write home about nor to write up on TFL.  And so I made what turned out to likely be the corrections necessary. Abel's masterful interpretation has the hydration in the 115%-120% range.  I have neither the nerve nor the skill to attempt to be in that neighborhood.  I made several changes from his posting and from what I was able to cull from past ciabatta experience as well as from a few videos in hopes of attaining a similar outcome. This was a two preferment affair, 100% hydration flour, and a 66% hydration biga, which I added for strength, because sure as the day is long, this dough needs strength and not extensibility.  In order to avoid too much heat from mixing friction I use the levain and the biga straight from the refrigerator and the bassinage incorporated cool (but could/ should have been cold) water. The total hydration is 95% - 90% water and 5% oil.  And it needs to be handled as little and as gently as possible. I suppose to be more "authentic" I could have trimmed the width of the loaves and made 4 or 5 instead of 3.  But for a second attempt and first successful one, I'm pretty pleased. The pile of goop after tripling in the tub  during BF. Divided and placed onto fairly well floured parchment.  No proofing time needed. i Just after loading. the dough is so wet as to appear to have no structure. Steam released and loaves rotated. I'm not a fan of anywhere near this much raw flour on the surface.  But with a dough this wet, it may be hard to avoid. The loaves are very light having shed a lot of moisture during the bake.  The "bald spot" on the lower left was the result of a giant gas bubble developing during the bake.
Just wanted to share this attempt to bake a traditional bread from France. From the book "Pains des boulangers" by Mouette Barboff. Happy Fall Season to all!
This week we have two brightly coloured loaves: one yellow and one purple.
I've been meaning to make panettone for quite some time.  The other day someone posted a link to Joe Pastry (https://joepastry.com/).  He stopped contributing to the site some time ago but the site is still active.  I love his approach and I was looking for a recipe that didn't require days on end of starter building.  The recipe follows BBA with minor tweaks. I'm interested to know what the texture is supposed to be like and what people think of my result.  It looks pretty exactly like the photos in the recipe (https://joepastry.com/2011/making-panettone/ and https://joepastry.com/2011/panettone-recipe/).  I was surprised that it wasn't more like brioche.  The fat content is fairly low.  I was expecting something between bread and cake, and this is more bread like than I expected.
35% dark rye, 5% ww, 60%bf.And a whole can of diet root beer at 83% hydration...plus a giant hole for the giggles.
Here in Indy, I'm part of a very informal "buyers club" of Country Life Natural Foods, www.clnf.org, that gets free shipping on large group orders.  When you buy 25 or 50 pound bags of grain, the savings on shipping is significant. I buy mainly Prairie Gold and Kamut wheat berries. But they also have bulk grains and flour of many varieties, seeds, cereals, and just all sorts of "baking stuff" (foods mainly, but a tiny  bit of supply/gear stuff.)  Organic and non-organic. 5 pounds to 50 pound bags. The minimum order for free shipping via their own truck is $400.  So with more people in the group, we could order more often with smaller orders per person.  You do have to order on their truck schedule. The coordinator lives in the NW quadrant of Marion County (Indy).  So if that's convenient to you, check CLNF's product line-up, their schedule for truck delivery dates, and ask for the coordinator's contact info. There is no monopoly on who can make up $400 orders, so if _you_ want to order $400 of stuff yourself, delivered to your house/workplace, or get friends together for a group order, you can do that too. As far as CLNF is concerned, the "coordinator" is the customer, and makes a single payment.  That person is responsible for collecting money, receiving the goods, and divvying up the order.
I am still lacking consistency bake to bake.  One reason is that I’m only baking sourdough every 2 weeks on average, but this week got another bake in.  I’ve still been trying Maurizio’s Beginner Sourdough as that was the first one I started with and wanted to gain some confidence baking it.  Two weeks ago I made an error and added way too much water and the dough lacked structure, it tasted fine but it was a bit on the pancake side of things.  This week I decided to hold back 20 g of water during autolyse, so rather than 78% hydration the bread would be 74%.  I estimate that the water I wet my hands with during the three sets of coil folds I did added back another 10 g or so, so perhaps the bread turned out to be 76% hydration?  The bread is about 80% white strong flour, 16% whole Red Fife and 4% whole rye.  I’ve also adjusted down the temperature after baking in the Dutch oven.  For this bake I turned the temperature down to 400ºF after taking the lid off the Dutch oven and then also placed the bread directly on the oven rack instead of back in the Dutch over uncovered.  I have found that the crust has been a bit too thick for my tastes, I would prefer slightly thinner.  We shall see if this change made any difference. I will post crumb shots later tonight or tomorrow as this bread part of tonight’s dinner with friends.
I loved last weekend’s apple pie and needed to bake another dessert to go with dinner tonight with friends.  I decided to make this Cranberry Apple Bourbon Pie this weekend.  I tried to do a plaid lattice design to also do something different than I have tried before.  As I have been doing, I used Bravetart’s all butter crust again as it has become my favorite.
I made two 800g loaves with 10% starter inoculation and 78% hydration (excluding the carrots), and 2.2% salt. I used a mix of grains. I have never used 10% rye before and this is my first time using spelt. I mixed in 100g of shredded carrot, 1 tbsp cumin, 1 tbsp coriander, and 1 tbsp caraway seed (all toasted and ground except for the caraway which I left whole). I replaced most of the water with carrot juice which I made by blending 5 carrots and 250g of water together. I made some really ugly loaves this morning so here's to hoping they taste better than they look!
I received requests for onion sourdough, so I decided to try a cornmeal porridge + onion loaf (similar to the porridge and shallot I made before, but different flours). I made two 900g loaves. The hydration including the porridge was very high, which made shaping difficult. I scored the loaves, but they ended up splitting open wherever they pleased! Yikes!
A friend requested a loaf with honey and oat porridge. So this is it! Recipe Makes 3 loaves Porridge 100 g rolled oats 200 g water 45 g honey 40 g butter Add-ins 75 g raw Sesame seeds Dough 700 g unbleached flour 200 g whole grain Red Fife flour 160 g whole grain Einkorn flour 68 g flax, freshly ground 700 g water + 25 g 23 g salt 30 g yogurt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) Extra wholegrain flour of your choice for feeding the levain Two mornings before: Take 18 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 18 g of filtered water and 18 g of wholegrain flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: Feed the levain 36 g of water and 36 g of wholegrain flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 72 g of filtered water and 72 g of strong baker’s flour and let rise until doubled (about 6 hours). Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: Mill the Red Fife and  Einkorn berries. Place the required amounts in a tub. Add the unbleached flour to the tub. Grind the flax seeds in a bullet and add to the flours in the tub. Cover and set aside. Make the porridge: Add the water to the rolled oats and cook on low until water is absorbed and porridge is creamy. Add the butter and the honey. Stir well and put into the fridge for the night. This can be done in the morning if you wish. I got lazy and prepared my porridge in the morning. Toast the sesame seeds in a dry frying pan or in the oven at 350 F. They are done when lightly golden and fragrant. Reserve. Dough Making day: Early in the morning, take out the levain and the porridge to warm up. Put 700 g filtered water in a stand mixer’s bowl and add the flours from the tub.  Mix on the lowest speed until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes a couple of minutes. Autolyse for at least a couple of hours at room temperature. Once the autolyse is done, add the salt, the yogurt , the extra water, and the levain to the bowl. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed for 8 minutes. At the end of the 8 minutes, add the toasted sesame seeds and the porridge and mix til incorporated. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~870 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and cross over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle a  mix of rice flour and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. Oops! Got great oven spring, tops hit the lid and I have flat topped loaves! Need to remember to cut back on this recipe or use bigger Dutch ovens.
So... one of my cloches had thru and thru cracks in the top and bottom... so had to toss it.  Got a 3.2 qt combo cooker and decided to try one loaf with  my new cooker and new sprouted wheat.  I chose an iteration of Maurizio's Sprouted wheat loaf here: https://www.theperfectloaf.com/sprouted-grain-sourdough-bread/ I used no AP flour, only my bread flour and also used 20% kamut. It turned out fine and tastes delicious.Love my new combo cooker.  Now I'll be able to compare w my cloche, of which I have one surviving. hester
Sweet, soft crumb, slightly tangy, with a fruity, citrusy aroma both from the earl grey tea leaf and the lime zest. I've been craving French toast and wanted something special instead of plain ol white sourdough. This is gonna do it if we don't kill it before it's stale enough for French toast..
It's been a long, hot summer. Well...not so long, but hot. Too hot to fire up the oven here in the house--and I hate that thought. So as the temperatures are dropping, so are the levels in my flour store since I'm making up for lost time. Add to that the fact that I'm looking for a new gig--as a bread baker and you've got the perfect recipe for....well....baking. As I was researching one of the places I was applying to today, I came across a menu item that I had not heard the name of--the Bialy. I was curious because the photo they had on their site looked tempting. So I started digging around on the internet and found a few formulas (including Hammelman's on the BBGA website). I also discovered that legend has it that the bilay originally hailed from Bialystock, Poland before it was introduced in NYC about 100 years ago. Hey...I happen to be Polish and am a sucker for trying any food from that country. SO it was game on. Using several recipes for inspiration, I came up with the following, which borrows heavily from Hammelman and several other blog posts:Onion filling:1 medium red onion, minced in a food processor (it was too strong to do by hand...)a bit of salt1 tsp poppy seedsolive oilThe Bread: 26 ounces KAF Sir Lancelot Flour  (100%)16 ounces water.5 ounces salt.5 ounces instant yeastFor filling:Heat oil in a pan, then add onions and salt to taste. Sautee the onions until they darken up a bit and become sweet. Remove from heat and add poppy seeds. Set asideBreadConfession time...I didn't get this right out of the gate. The original formula I used had 16 ounces of flour and was...well, anyone remember attempting to eat the salted dough that you can use for making things like Christmas ornaments? Yeah...it was almost like that originally (oops), so I added more salt and more water to arrive at the numbers above. Anyway...nothing fancy here. Mix as usual, knead for...well, until it's ready (I had a smooth, sticky dough when done). Set it in a lightly oiled bowl for bulk fermentation for about 11/2 hours. Degas, divide 12 ways (roughly 5 ounces per portion), and make flattened rounds, putting each on a half sheet covered with parchment paper. Cover and let rise for 30 minutes. Then, create a depression in the middle of the round (about 1/2 of the round? I eyeballed it) and fill with the filling (I used roughly 1tsp each...it took some experimenting to get a roughly even amount between them all).  Let rise for an additional 20 minutes or so and then pre-heat your oven to 450 degrees. Sprinkle with additional poppy seeds and bake for 12-15 minutes.  Note, I had 2 half sheets, one that I'm not too fond of so I swapped racks and rotated them about 1/2 way through the baking process too prevent burning and make sure they cooked evenly. Hope you enjoy! I had one as soon as it was cool enough to eat and it was FABULOUS.
Favorite Baking Books: Tartine Book No. 3, by Chad Robertson. Whole Grain Breads, by Peter Reinhart. The Bread Baker's Apprentice, by Reinhart. Tartine Bread, by Chad Robertson. Flour - Water - Salt - Yeast, by Ken Forkish. Healthy Bread in Five Minutes a Day, by Hertzberg and Francois. The New Healthy Bread in Five Minutes a Day, by Hertzberg and Francois. Artisan Pizza and Flatbread in Five Minutes a Day, by Hertzberg and Francois. The Tassajara Bread Book, by Edward Espe Brown. Local Breads, by Daniel Leader. Bread Alone, by Daniel Leader. The Village Baker, by Joe Ortiz. The Laurel's Kitchen Bread Book, by Laurel Robertson. The Italian Baker, by Carol Field. Beard on Bread, by James Beard. Location: Indiana Interests:  Near 100%, and at least 70%, whole grain loaves and flat-breads, mostly sourdough. Baking Vessels: Lodge 3.2 qt cast iron combo cooker. Glass covered caserole.  Lodge 9" cast iron griddle. 8", 9",  10" cast iron pans. 5 qt enameled oval dutch oven.  Synthetic (cordierite) baking stone, 14-5/8", $10 from Aldi.  Lodge 14" cast iron pizza pan/griddle. Crofton 1.75 qt enameled cast iron sauce pan with lid, from Aldi.  Also bake in 1 qt and 2qt Pyrex/Anchor borosilicate measuring vessels. Other Gear: Schule grain mill, hand crank, for cracking grain (does not make flour.) Wonder Junior Deluxe (hand operated), from WonderMill. Vitamix blender (regular blade, not the one for grains) for fine milling of pre-cracked grain.  Cheap $10 electric coffee/spice grinder for spices and small batches of flax, millet, amaranth, chia. Top Two Grains: Prairie Gold (Hard White Spring) from Wheat Montana  (purchased thru CLNF), and Kamut (also from CLNF). Favorite grains/flours: Prairie Gold, home-milled and store-bought flour. Kamut, home-milled. High extraction durum flour ("Fiber Wala"), from Sher Brar Mills, available at Indian/Pakistani stores. Bob's Red Mill Whole Wheat Pastry Flour. Spelt, home-milled and store-bought flour. Hard Red Spring Wheat, home-milled. Teff Flour, from Patel Brothers, or other Indian/Pakistani stores. Flax seeds. Favorite Suppliers: Country Life Natural Foods, www.clnf.org, group orders. Patel Brothers, and other local Indo/Pak stores. E&S Sales, Shipshewana, Indiana, has 50 pound bags and repacks of dozens of grains/flours. Group order (4000 pounds, minimum) direct from Wheat Montana.
So the baking continues. With three upcoming interviews I want to make sure I'm on my game, so I decided to do one of my favorite breads to make--with a twist. I LOVE making baguettes. Wait. Let's be honest...I LOVE EATING baguettes. Making them is Ok. Especially when they're higher hydration, which I find challenging still. But whatever...a challenge is a challenge and I'm not usually one to let that stop me. So I dug out one of my favorite recipes for country baguette--from Martin Philip's wonderful book"Bread Making--A Baker's Journey Home in 75 Recipes" and got at it. And ran immediately into challenge #1: I didn't read his advice on equipment BEFORE buying a scale...so I have what I was comfortable with--one of the older spring type scales that measures down to the ounce...and 100kg increments. But if your familiar with Martin's formulas, they're in ounces. Hey...it's just math, right? So I grabbed pen and paper and got to it:Liquid levain:3 ounces APF4 ounces water2 tablespoons (exactly...honest ;) ) sourdough culture (discard? same thing...)The Rest of the Story: 9 ounces bread flour2 ounces whole wheat flour (I used hard winter wheat (red) because it seems to work better here)1/2 tsp salt1 tsp dry yeast (Martin's idea...not mine but it does seem to deepen the flavor)the levain I put together last nightBulk ferment: 2hrs, slap and fold every 20 minutes for the first hour and leave it alone for the secondpre-shape into tubes, rest 15 shape into baguetteslet rise 30 minutes then preheat the over to 500 degrees F (I add a pan with water for steam)Bake 5 minutes, remove steam, drop temp to 425 and bake for 20 minutes or so more (internal temp of 190-200 degrees F)Sounds easy enough, right? And it was...until I discovered that I didn't flour my couche *quite* enough. Ugh. So much for the first perfect loaf. And then I realized that I had neglected to MEASURE the baguette shapes against the baguette pan I have--and they were too long. I also made the mistake of trying to pick the first baguette up from the ends (hey...I was gentle!). I KNOW BETTER. It proceeded to droop in the center--making it even longer! GREAT! I threw that loaf at the pan in disgust (gently!) and ROLLED the next one out of the couche. Still too long, but much better. Rinse and repeat with contestant number 3, adjusting the last two onto the pan and resigning myself to making croutons. Finally, I grab my $8 lame and *try* to make good, solid cuts, but the tool fails me again (it's curved and I've never been able to get the foolish curve thing figured out). Croutons are looking really good...besides I love them on salad. BUT...it didn't take long for the baguettes to spring in the oven and the result wasn't quite as terrible as I thought it would be. Would I serve them to company? Not without cutting them (into croutons) but hey, it's dang tasty! Oh...right...lessons:FLOUR THE COUCHE! The result of not doing it are...ummm...messy.If you have a pan that's 12 inches in length, 16 inch baguettes don't work so well regardless of how good of an idea it may seem (i.e. measure twice, cut once!)find a new lame.And on a positive note, the more challenging the dough is to work with, the better the resulting bread when you get it right.
Sabine https://www.instagram.com/p/B3PswM2AWiD/
Hi all! My name is Kris I live in Girvan which is in Scotland. This is my first bake using a yeasted dough (milk bread recipe). The batch baked rolls seem to have turned out ok. Whereas the loaf needs work. Not sure what I’ve done wrong. Maybe under proved? Practice makes perfect. I think next time I will try and tighten up on my shaping and prove for longer. The crumb
Love these real artisan baking videos.  If the bread was 4# and tastes as good as Poilane's then he cold sell it for 9.6 Euros in Paris and $50 in Phoenix:-) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8B_7AFYmkYo&feature=youtu.be&fbclid=IwAR1Nz9zmAcgRP_QbwvbmCyn70HERUM-6aw0F5JSBuhYgzgRZezIkIBrcGuE&app=desktop
Made with 350g of non alcoholic cider, dates, cranberries and apricots, kamut and whole wheat for a sweet but slightly hearty loaf. Shaping was bad, I knew it wasn't quite tight enough but rushed it in the banneton anyway while preparing dinner. Taste is heavenly, insanely fruity and soft. Few days before this bake, I almost kill Otis's (my starter's)entire family, had 2 batches of prefermemt in the oven with light on, and then I had to use the oven to roast some veggies, well you can guess what happened next. Luckily I had exactly 20g of stater left in the fridge, and made a few bakes after the revival. My favorite 50% whole einkorn and another batch of burger buns. Otis had a strong comeback.
Here's my plan.  This is based on past loaves, where I've measured, and where I've not measured; but this is not an exact duplicate of anything past.  (SOTSOT = some o' this, some o' that.) Started: Tue, Oct 15, 2019. Goals: A)  3 pounds of dough, to fit in a 5 qt oval enameled cast iron dutch oven, (just happens to be Paula Deen brand). I want a big loaf. I bought this DO  ridiculously cheap at a Tuesday Morning close-out store after she "fell from grace" and her stuff was liquidated. It still didn't sell well, so then Tues Morning discounted it further. B) Near 100% whole grain/whole-meal, mostly home-milled, (Gotta practice cooking and eating "prepper food" and use up/rotate what's in storage.)  And I just LIKE home-milled whole-meal bread! C) Bulk of flour to be home-milled Prairie Gold, HWSW (Hard white spring wheat), and home-milled Kamut. D) relatively lower salt, as I like to eat bread: - - - 1) with toppings/dips. - - - 2) to sop up sauces. - - - 3) and use toast cubes as my carb ingredient for stews. Planned Ingredients: Flour: 250 g Prairie Gold. Cracked in a manual Shule 3-roller grain mill, then 30 seconds in a Vitamix blender, highest speed, regular blade, not their grain container. The blender heats up the flour. So cracking it first in the cool Shule prevents/eliminates most of the heat build up in the blender. Putting whole kernals in the blender also scratches up the plastic container. I "blend/mill" 8 ounces of grain at a time, about 1 cup or less of whole kernals. Only 30 seconds in the Vitamix makes a blend of differing particle sizes in each 8 ounce batch, which I like.  The largest are gritty, but still smaller than average sand.  The long ferment times of sourdough baking overcome this grittiness, and I don't notice it in the final bread, as the large particles eventually get fully hydrated and softened. But the somewhat delayed absorption means that you have to make the dough look and feel wetter initially.  It's not all gritty, nor is it all coarse. Each 8 ounce batch just runs the gamut from fine, medium, coarse, to a little grit. 225 g Kamut. Same as above. 50 g fresh ground* flaxseed, for fiber, for looks, and oil. 50 g dark rye flour, Bob's Red Mill, for taste, look, and fermentability. 25 g home ground* millet, from BRM's whole  millet, for flavor, and a little crunch. 25 g home ground* amaranth, from Market District's whole amaranth. For flavor, and a little crunch. (* = done in small electric coffee grinder.) 25 g coconut flour, store-bought, for a little extra protien and oil. total so far = 650 g. ---- 200 g Levain @ 100% hydration, from Carl's starter: - - - 50 g Generic store-bought AP flour. - - - 50 g Bob's Red Mill Whole Wheat Pastry flour.  The starter seems to like this. - - - 100 g water. --- Additional water: 500 g.  (Updated to 550 g to get the right feel of hydration during the mix.) Salt: 12 gr.  12 / 750 = 1.6%.  Yes, that seems low for near 100% whole grain, but see above. I dip bread in seasoned/spiced oil, or use it to sop up sauces, or toast it and put it in my spicy stews.  The heartiness/robustness of near 100% whole-grain low-salt toast goes well with my highly flavored stew.  This toast and stew combo has a nice macho and frontier-like quality, as if I'm a lumber-jack in the Pacific Northwest, or a grizzled sourdough gold prospector in the Klondike. It would make Tim the Toolman say "Argh! Argh! Argh!"  ... But I digress.... --- Total flour: 650 g + 100 g from levain: = 750 g Total water: 500 g + 100 g from levain = 600 g  (Update: total 650 g water.) Hydration: 650 / 750 = 86.7% (Based on past experience, I may have to increase hydration with this home-milled flour.) Total weight: 750 + 650 + 12 = 1412 g = 3.1 pounds. --- Techniques: - Home-milled whole-grains go well with an autolyse before adding in the levain, so that the bran and the large particles have time to absorb some water. To facilitate mixing, I don't autolyse all the flour, or use all the water. After a short autolyse, I add the remaining water to thin the  levain, and mix the thinned levain into the still overly wet dough; the wetness of both making mixing easier.  I may give it a rest at this point, while it is still moist (it is still lacking the last bit of flour) and still without the salt, to give the yeasties a head start without salt.  Then I slowly add the rest of the flour comingled with salt.  This last mixing takes the form of folding/kneading.  This is usually the final chance to eyeball and feel the dough and make adjustments to hydration by adding more flour or more water. I have done so much "on the fly" or "by the seat of my pants" formulas and mixing, without measuring, that I can't give a fixed  hydration percent for my formulas.  I'm going to try to do better, by weighing my final adjustments, so that I can share my formulas, and actually replicate them myself if they turn out well. If my dough is too wet, I usually adjust with more  AP flour, or bread flour, or BRM Whole Wheat Pastry flour, as they absorb water much more quickly than home-milled or even store bought whole-wheat. That gives quicker feedback, so I can "feel" when the hydration is in the Goldilocks zone of "just right." If my initial mix is too dry, I work in water with the fold-and-knead method, and the side benefit is some gluten development. My bulk ferment is not scientific. I just eyeball it.  I line my banneton with a flour-sack towel, or the linen liner it came with, dusted with white rice flour or a mix of white rice flour and AP/Bread flour.  Letter fold, flour,  shape, and flour the dough, put in banneton. Eyeball the final ferment, finger test. This will be baked in either the 5 qt enameled cast iron oval dutch oven, or if it's not that big, in the 3.2 quart Lodge not-enameled cast iron combo-cooker. My 2-pound loaves of this formulation (or thereabouts) usually bake in 1 hour, to get the right combo of internal temp (210F), and color of crust.  So this will  take longer. I eventually want to get up to 4 pound miches. I'll first see how this 3-pounder fits size-wise in the 5 qt dutch oven, and then see what it takes to outgrow that and have to use the baking stone.
Just saw a great article on the UK's Guardian about the perils of processed bread. https://www.theguardian.com/food/2019/oct/10/flour-power-meet-the-bread-heads-baking-a-better-loaf?utm_term=RWRpdG9yaWFsX0d1YXJkaWFuVG9kYXlVUy0xOTEwMTA%3D&utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=GuardianTodayUS&CMP=GTUS_email
Back once more from roaming the earth and, within way less than a day home, my wife coaxed me into thinking about a next bake.  I left it to her imagination what would be next, but she deferred to me. In the past I'd baked the Hamelman black olive levain a few handful of times, particularly in response to our building's chief engineer's constant "whining" about when I'd bake it again and slip him a loaf. A 65% hydration dough with 25% olives makes for a hearty if not particularly open crumb.  In keeping with my M.O. of mostly avoiding posting the same thing twice here on TFL, there was just enough tweak to qualify for this post. Changes from the original included using 100% LL instead of his 125% LL, changed to AP flour from higher protein bread flour, substituted rye flour for WW, and used rather large quarter-sliced "spears" of large green Spanish Queen olives rather than smaller and diced Kalamta flecks. Otherwise I abided by the original formula. These olives are quite salty, so they were scaled and quartered, placed into a water bath for a while to remove some salinity, and then toweled dry. Abel Sierra posted somewhere that baguettes should be couched seam side up.  I did so with one of the two.  But then in my infinite wisdom, once loaded into the oven, I neglected to track which of the two loaves were which since I rotate loaves a few times during the bake. I can't check what the crumb looks like on either the batard or the more open grine baguette as they were both delivered to the chief engineer and our office manager.  Intact! One does exhibit a more open grigne than the other, but I am clueless as to which was which.  The batard was couched seam side down. At 65% hydration and weighed down by the mass of olives, the crumb doesn't exhibit a lot of openness.  The old saying is you can't eat the holes. The formula normalized to 1000g 1x600g batard, 2x425g long batards/baguettes.
I’m feeling more confident now with this sourdough recipe.  I’ve had pretty good success now that I’ve baked it a few times with the hydration lowered to 74% from about 78%.  This is Maurizio’s beginner sourdough recipe which fortunately we love the flavour of.  The only change this time was that I added 0.5% diastatic malt powder to the dough during the autolyse.  I believe it did make the fermentation go faster than usual as the dough appeared nicely fermented after 4 hours at 80ºF and with my starter it usually takes 4.5 to 5 hours before it appears nicely fermented so I think it does what it advertises.  Tonight we’ll cut it and taste it to see how it affects the crumb texture and flavour.  The other change I made during the baking process was that I baked it in my DO at the highest rack that I could still fit it on and place a cookie tray on the rack below to shield it from the direct heat.  Also, I’ve started to pull the bread out of the DO after taking the lid off and then placing the bread with the parchment onto the rack in the oven directly.  I’ve made this change to try to get the bottom crust to be baked more similarly to the sides and top as I’ve often found that the bottom crust to be much thicker than the rest of the crust and I’m hoping that this will help make it less thick.  Again we’ll see if these changes help.  I’ve continued to use slap and folds and coil folds with the dough and I think I’m building pretty good structure this way. I also tried to score a bit of a pattern on the side of the loaf.  I will need to put a bit of flour on the dough prior to scoring in the future if I want the pattern to actually show, but not a bad outcome for a first try. Benny
This is a popular loaf for Canadian Thanksgiving. For this batch, I adapted my levain building procedure to have 1:2:2 ratio at each build. Reading a few recent posts about feeding ratios prompted me to try this as my levain often has a bit of acetone smell at its peak which might mean it’s starving. With the 1:2:2 ratio, I didn’t notice that smell but I also didn’t find that it rose any faster. It still took 6 hours to come close to double on the last build before I put it in the fridge. By the way, thank you to those (Dabrownman and Ian if I remember right) that do refrigerate the last build before using it. It is really convenient to be able to use the levain when I want it rather than waiting hours for it to be ready. Much easier to time the autolyse this way! Recipe Makes 3 loaves Dough: 700 g strong bakers unbleached flour 200 g fresh milled Kamut 100 g fresh milled Einkorn 75 g dry Wild Rice (~168 g cooked) 150 g dried cranberries 700 g water 30 g yogurt 30 g honey 22 g salt 250 g of 3 stage 100% hydration levain (procedure below) Rye flour (or any other wholegrain flour) to feed the levain Two mornings before: Take 2 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 4 g of filtered water and 4 g of wholegrain rye flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: Feed the levain 20 g of water and 20 g of wholegrain rye flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 100 g of filtered water and 100 g of strong baker’s flour and let rise until doubled (about 6 hours). Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: I use homemilled flour so if you are doing the same, measure out the stated amount for each type of flour in berries or grain, and mill it on the finest setting of your home mill. If buying flour, get the freshest that you can and try to ensure that it is wholegrain. Place the required amounts of the wholegrain flours in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. Cover and set aside. Cook the wild rice in plenty of boiling water until tender. This took an hour. Drain, add the dried cranberries, mix well, and refrigerate overnight. Dough making day: When ready to make the dough, take the wild rice and the levain out of the fridge to warm up before being used in the dough. Using a stand mixer, mix the water with the flour, and mix on speed 1 until all the flour has been hydrated. Let this autolyse for a couple of hours. Once the autolyse is done, add the salt, the yogurt, the honey, and the levain to the bowl. Mix on speed one for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on speed 2 for 9 minutes. Add the cooked wild rice and cranberries to the mixing bowl, and mix on speed 2 until they are evenly distributed. This should only take a minute or two. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~780 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the top of the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle a  mix of rice and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. I am quite happy with these loaves. Nice oven spring and beautiful colour. I probably won’t get a crumb shot as they are all promised to other people.
It has been a while between posts.  I've been busy with the new start-up I'm working for so have not had a lot of time to post anything.  I made this tasty bake a few weeks ago. I had found a nice surprise of Farro berries at the new Whole Foods that opened and I'm really liking the nutty flavor.  The balance of the flour was KAF bread flour along with some ricotta to soften the crumb and plenty of tasty pecans and dried cherries that were re-hydrated in water. The flavor on this one was terrific.  I could have done a better job of getting the cherries more evenly distributed, but there's just enough in each slice to make it work. The crumb is decently open for a bread with so many goodies packed in. Give this one a try if you get a chance.  You can sub whole wheat for the Farro and it should come out just fine. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the sweet potato with 90% of the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, olive oil, salt and the balance of the water and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Below is the nice moist and colorful crumb.
I recently discovered a blog called: Tavola Mediterranea - Home of Culinary Archaeology on the Web. It is a fascinating and very informative blog on ancient history and baking. Two breads on this site really caught my attention and had me heading into the kitchen. The Roman Panis Quadratus and a Greek Prosphora. The first bread I baked is Panis Quadratus. It featured in a post on baking with the Romans. The most interesting thing about this bread is that carbonised loaves were unearthed from the ruins at Pompeii. This version is a 100% wholewheat sourdough loaf that contains poppy seed, fennel seed and parsley. I think my modern wholewheat was not quite strong enough or else, I must not have tied the belt around the toga tight enough. My bread developed a bit of a belly, like a lazy Roman emperor. It is a reasonably dense loaf, but not heavy and tastes really good. I will try her second version that is 50% wholewheat and 50% spelt flour next. A carbonised bread from the Pompeii ruins.
Having recently returned from a trip to Italy where we also visited Liguria for the first time, I feel in love with a good focaccia.  In fact, I craved it so much that I decided to try baking it at home, instead of my traditional sourdough bread.  I don’t use instant yeast, and always bake sourdough, so I figured I would try making a sourdough focaccia. It turned out that there are as many focaccia recipes out there as of anything else, so I used several ones from this site, as well what I found elsewhere on the internet to come up with my own.  The goal was to bake a decent first approximation, and then try tuning the recipe to improve it.  I am not bragging, but I must say that even the first attempt came out pretty nice, and the taste was certainly pretty close to what I remembered from the trip. In the spirit of sharing, below is the recipe I used, as well as the steps.  I will be definitely making it again, perhaps with some minor adjustments.  I used regular unbleached all-purpose (AP) flour for this recipe, since I felt that focaccia didn’t need to rise too much, so strong gluten development was not necessary. Levain: 150g total, made from 50g starter @ 100% hydration, 50g water and 50g AP flour.  The levain was left to develop on countertop for about 7 hrs. Flour: 450g AP unbleached flourWater: 280gEVOO (extra virgin olive oil): 20gSalt: 10g Total flour: 450g+75g from levain= 525g - 100%Water: 280g+75g from levain=355g - 67.5%EVOO: 3.8%Salt: 1.9% I mixed levain, warm water, and flour, and let it stand in the mixing bowl for ~1 hr to let the flour absorb water, and the yeast to start working.  Then I mixed in the salt and EVOO, and worked it in a KitchenAid stand mixer with a dough hook for ~7 min on speed 2.  Transferred the dough in a glass bowl greased with a bit of EVOO, let it stand for 1 hr, then did 3 round of S&F right in the bowl (or is it considered “pinch and fold?”) with 30 min rest intervals in between. Since I always cold retard my sourdough breads to bake them in the morning (so we don’t wind up eating a half loaf of nice fresh bread right before bedtime 😊), I decided to cold retard this dough as well.  I retarded it in the fridge, right in the bowl overnight. In the morning I took it out of the bowl into a 1/2 sized baking sheet greased with some EVOO, pressed down with my fingers enough to make the dough thin and spread on the sheet, brushed slightly with more EVOO, and loosely covered with plastic film. I let the dough warm up and rise on the countertop for ~1.5 hrs.The oven was pre-heated to 450F, then I lowered the temp to 430F, sprinkled the dough with some coarse sea salt and freshly chopped rosemary and baked for 26 min, rotating the sheet once during that time.  Finally, after focaccia was removed from the oven and onto a cooling rack, it was brushed with some more EVOO! (You will notice that there’s quite a lot of olive oil being used in this recipe, as well as most other recipes I saw. For that reason, I reduced the initial amount of oil in the dough somewhat, as some recipes called for 4.5% or even more). Final thoughts: If I bake it again, I will report back with regards to how any adjustments helped – or didn’t. 😊 Happy baking! Cooper
The big lesson I learned here was that it just takes autolyse time for coarse ground home-milled whole wheat to absorb the water  and make gluten. I let the 440 g of hard white  spring wheat, 220 g of Kamut, and 25 g coarse ground millet, autolyse for 3 hours. About 86% hydration. It was still a bit like wet sand after 3 hours. Then folded in the 141 g of 100% hydration levain, but not salt. Let sit 30 minutes, then one set of stretch and folds. Let sit 30 minutes, then went to fold in salt,  and lo-and-behold, it was now DOUGH!  No more "wet sand!" Woo-HOO! My milling method is this: Weigh out 8 oz of raw berries in quart sized plastic bags: 3 pounds of HWSW (Prairie Gold), and 1.5 pounds of Kamut. Run the 1/2 pound mini-batches through a hand crank Shule grain mill that "cracks" it. Store the bags in the fridge to cool them down so they don't over-heat in the next step. Mill the 8 oz cracked wheat in the Vitamix blender (regular blade, not the dry grain container) for 30 seconds, 20 of which are high speed.  Put baggie back in fridge to cool. When mixed with water, this coarse grind makes what I call "wet sand."  But with hydration and time, it smooths out. Now I know it takes 4 hours to totally smooth out like "dough" instead of sand. This loaf came out of the oven with real air pockets, not a "foam" style crumb, as my previous 100% whole grain loaves.
Sleeping Giant Brewery is one of our very successful local breweries. So when it turned out that the stout I used in this recipe last April, was no longer available, it was a no brainer to support our local brewery. Hopefully, this tastes as good as the last time! Recipe Makes 3 loaves Soaker 180 g oats 200 g stout beer (Sleeping Giant Skull Rock Stout) Dough 720 g Unbleached flour 200 g freshly milled Selkirk wheat flour (200 g Selkirk wheat berries) 100 g freshly milled Einkorn flour (100 g Einkorn wheat berries) 600 g water 100 g stout beer (Sleeping Giant Skull Rock Stout) 24 g Pink Himalayan salt 30 g yogurt 250 g Levain (procedure in recipe) 125 g 2 Year Old White Cheddar, finely cubed Extra whole grain flour (I used einkorn and kamut) and unbleached flour to feed the levain Two mornings before: Take 2 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 4 g of filtered water and 4 g of wholegrain flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: Feed the levain 20 g of water and 20 g of wholegrain flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 100 g of filtered water and 100 g of strong baker’s flour and let rise until doubled (about 6 hours). Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: I mill my own wholegrain flour so if you are doing the same, measure out the stated amount for each type of flour in berries or grain, and mill it on the finest setting of your home mill. If buying flour, get the freshest that you can and try to ensure that it is wholegrain. Place the required amounts of the wholegrain flours in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. Cover and set aside. Cut the cheese into very small pieces, sprinkle with a bit of flour, toss and place covered into the fridge. Tip: If you sprinkle the flour on the cheese before chopping it, it makes it stick less to itself. Dough making day: Take the levain out of the fridge to warm up on the counter. I usually give it a stir to redistribute the beasties and give them access to more food. In a stand mixer’s bowl, add the water, the second amount of stout beer and the flours. Mix on the lowest speed until you have a shaggy dough with no dry spots. This takes a couple of minutes. Autolyse for a couple of hours at room temperature. Mix the soaker together and cover. Let rest on the counter. Once the levain is ready, add the salt, the yogurt, and the levain to the bowl. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed up for 9 minutes. Then add the cheese cubes and the soaker, and mix for another minute or two. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~830 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the top of the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle a  mix of rice and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. Amazing oven spring! Loaves hit the lid while baking! So we have flat tops! 😂 All loaves are spoken for so no crumb shot or taste notes.
Just saw a reference to a sourdough podcast from one of the newspapers I subscribe to. I've not listened to it, so I can't give an opinion to the pod casts. From a quick scan of the web site, the content looks to be quite good though. https://www.thesourdoughpodcast.com
Hi I am new to this site and a newbie at baking bread.  I am trying to create a starter and the method I am using is from here. I am up to day three and my starter has NOT risen.  Is there such a thing as a dead starter and can one revive same say with a few grains of yeast or apple cider vinegar to lower the ph. OR AM I,  just impatient?  The temperature in my kitchen is between 70 and 75 F. Can someone guide me in the right direction please. Thanks GregT
I found photos of the beautiful flat breads that they bake in Uzbekistan on a travel blog and headed to my kitchen. The bread stamps that they use, called chekich, is not available here, so I spent an afternoon in the garage making my own. It is a soft fluffy bread that contains yogurt. According to their tradition the bread should be torn by hand and not sliced. Quick and easy to make and eat. Chekich production in progress in our garage.
This was my take on the roasted butternut squash sourdough by Sarah Owens, but I decided to sub out the flours and make a savory version by replacing cherries with sunflower and pumpkin seeds. The hydration was only 55% before the squash and this was definitely the most disappointing crumb I have had in the last few months, but I hope it makes a decent sandwich bread. Maybe I should have developed the dough more in the mixing stage? 450
This was another loaf inspired by Sarah Owens, but again I swapped out the add-ins and the flours used. I like Danni's idea of using cranberries and nuts so I used those instead of the herbs suggested by Sarah Owens. Delicious loaf!
I found a package with Emmer flour in the larder that I had totally forgotten about so my weekly bake for friends consisted of 25% Emmer with the rest Marriages Strong White as I had not baked with this flour for a long time and did not want to go wild too quickly....and risk the friends ending up with disaster loaves...ha, ha.... I sadly could not cut into them and then used the same approach for another bake two days later that I almost forgot to cut into but managed to take a photo before it was all gone... I often bake now 20% starter at 100% hydration (as colder now), 2% salt, 78% hydration which at a temp of 25C gives me a bulk of around 4 hours ish with a couple of coil folds on an hourly basis and left alone for the last hour or so... I like to develop gluten a bit more upfront and normally do some slap and folds after I have added the salt...I can't tell anymore what the percentage of rise is but probably when I have more than one loaf bulking I play it a bit safe and don't let them go quite as high as 50% as I know the wine cooler will struggle with all those loaves and even at 4C they rise a little bit in there.... The Emmer flour was quite dark and I  loved the flavour so shall order more next time from Shipton Mill...
Mon Oct 21, 2019. I've previously done 40% Kamut, then 33% Kamut, now this is 25% Kamut in relation to Prairie Gold (HWSW), in hopes of better gluten development.  Kamut has more protein, and can be used for 100% loaves, but it's like durum, it's not going to easily be a fluffy yeasted loaf. 525 g Prairie Gold hard white spring wheat (HWSW), home-milled, coarse. 175 g Kamut, home-milled, coarse. 7 g malt flour, home ground Briess malted white wheat from a brewer's supply. So sugar doesn't run out for yeast, for a good oven rise. http://brewingwithbriess.com/Products/Wheat.htm 25 g dark rye flour, Bob's Red Mill, again so sugar doesn't run out for a good oven spring. 20 g BRM whole wheat pastry flour. I forgot why I added this. 752 g flour ao far. 653 g bottle spring water.  86.8% Hydration so far.  Mixed in stainless steel bowl  at 9:47 am. Start autolyse in oven, about 80 F. 10:20 am. stretch and fold.  11:18 am. S&F.    12:17 pm. S&F. 12:18 pm S&F.   12:49 pm. S&F.  1:45 pm. S&F. 1:52 pm. Added and folded in 200 g of 100% hydration Starter. No salt yet. Flour now = 852g. Water now = 753g. ==> 88.38% Hydration. --- Percent Prefermented Flour, PPF, 100 / 852 = 11.7 %. Starter is a mish mash of Whole Wheat Pastry flour, Rye flour, home-milled Prairie Gold, and white rice flour.  Culture came from Carl's Oregon Trail starter, https://www.carlsfriends.net 2:44 pm. Now feels like dough!  Folded in salt with some water. 14.5 g Himalayan salt (1.7%), dissolved in 12.5 g water.  Dough now got stiffer with the salt in it. I could feel it change right there. Total weight = 852 + 753 + 14.5 salt + 12.5 water = 1632 g.  3.59 pounds. Final hydration = 89.8%. 3:52 pm. S&F.  4:30 pm. S&F.  5:05 pm. S&F.  5:34 pm. S&F. 6:07 pm.  Fold and shape, dusted with BRM Whole Wheat Pastry flour, because I ran out of AP flour, and my home-mlled stuff  is too coarse.  Put it  in a banneton lined with a towel dusted with white rice flour. One hour Final Ferment in oven at about 80F. 7:07 pm take out of oven, in order to pre-heat oven,  finger test, looks ready, but still  need to preheat oven.  I didn't think it would be ready so fast. Must be the rye and malt flour in mix, and rye in the starter.  Put banneton in fridge. 7:08 pm Preheating oven at 495/475F.  The first number is oven setting, second number is adjusted/actual temp, as oven is 20 degrees cooler than thermostat, according to thermometer.  This notation allows me to not get confused "Did I write down thermostat setting, or adjusted temp?" Also pre-heating the Lodge 3.2 qt combo-cooker, and a 14.5" baking stone on the rack underneath the combo-cooker's rack. 8:04 pm.  Insulated inner bottom of lid/skillet with corn meal, parchment paper cut into 9" circle on top of corn meal, and more corn meal on top of parchment paper.  Inner bottom diameter of lid/skillet is 9". Load.  Oops. Deflated dough when I inverted banneton into off hand. Should have used something else. Lesson learned.  Scored top with bare razor blade, no lame. 8:06 pm.  Bake covered at 475/455 F. The deep pot part of the combo is the "hat".  Baking stone is shielding the combo-cooker from direct radiant heat of lower oven element.  10 minutes. 8:16 pm.  Continue baking, covered. 450/430 F.  25 minutes. 8:41 pm. Uncover. We have lift-off!  Oven spring!   Even though I accidentally deflated it.  Not enough spring to be Instagram-worthy, but best result so far.  Lower oven setting to 420/400 F.   16 minutes. 8:57 pm. Still uncovered. Lowered oven to 400/380 F.  27 Minutes. 9:30 pm. Take out. Total time 1 hr, 24 min.  Inner temp 208.6 F.    Would like a higher inner temp, but 84 min is enough. Final loaf weight: 1364 g = 3.00 pounds. Now if I can just resist cutting into this until tomorrow morning.  Put in a paper grocery bag for overnight. Tues, Oct 22, 2019. 8:45 am. Cut open.  Crumb is no better than last bake.  So my deduction is just that I got rise in the oven this time that previously happened in the final ferment.  Taste is not as good as previous two bakes at this time point. Maybe because ferments were shorter.  Crust still hard.  Cut off enough to fit the loaf in a 1 gallon plastic zipper bag.  Crumb is still plenty moist, so the crust will soften up in the sealed bag.  Taste usually improves by the 24 hour mark
My father, Norman Horwitz, was a renaissance man. He was a medical nuclear physicist, at the forefront of the fight against cancer. Outside of work, Norm was an inventor and trendsetter. Among his passions were cooking and baking. From an early age I would find issues of Gourmet magazine around his reading chair. At the end of a year or so, my Dad had the issues bound at a book bindery. I remember how tempting those fat volumes were, sitting so properly on their shelf in his library. I loved to look through the glossy pages of these precious volumes. Another passion of Norm's was collecting old cookbooks, often from cooks and bakers who were innovators. I remember watching Julia Child and The Galloping Gourmet on television; this was before the Internet, cable, the Create Channel, and social media groups like the one I am typing in just now. Norm would have loved the Internet! Norm loved to bake bread. He chatted up the local Jewish baker to try to find out the secret of his Kaiser rolls. He brought home thick tiles to put into the oven to bake bread with, infusing them with water to produce steam in order to achieve the type of crust he'd grown to love in France. By this time I was in my teens, and Norm encouraged my interest in bread making. He bought me Bernard Clayton's Bread Book--a bible I still rely on today. I was successful with many bakes from this book and I loved experimenting. I just baked a batch of buttermilk loaves, my family's favorite. Because of Norm, I am sitting here at the kitchen table, which was his kitchen table. On the counter behind me are three sourdough starters bubbling away. Hopefully they will get me back into baking the sourdough I learned about from a class at Zingerman's. I also bought a Udemy class by Teresa Greenway from Northwest Sourdough and I just remembered I also have a few others of hers that I haven't watched yet: Learn to Bake Magnificent Challah Bread and Bake Classic Sourdough Bread Like a Professional! Woo-hoo!!! My heart is full of you, Norm, Dad, my mentor and inspiration in so many things I love about life. Thank you for the gift of bread.
Steel cut oats, Flaxseeds, whole wheat, dark rye, kamut, herb de provence Medium hydration, about 72%, 48 hour retard. Tall, and fine crumbs! Perfect for sandwiches!
I am pleased with the way this came out (poor slashing and dull razor blade aside).  Chad Robertson's recipes require paying close attention as he spends a lot of time on each of the baking steps as part of his knowledge sharing.  The pictures provided fresh insight on steps I perhaps i missed in the past.  I hadn't made one of his recipes in a long time as the his 75% hydration can make it tricky and the loaves can come out rather flat without proper shaping techniques. Over the past few months the recurring theme from web searches, YouTube and other recipes posted on TFL is the importance when shaping to tighten up the outer skin on both the pre-shape and final shaping cupping your hands and using a gentle sliding of the dough lightly across the countertop a few times into the ball shape. That was a critical component in getting a nice rise in the final loaves. The recipe uses a four hour proofing period with stretch and folds every 30 minutes for two hours,with two more hours at 30 minute intervals of a more gentle S&F being mindful of not deflating.  This is followed by a  20- 40 minute bench rest which I never tried before but thought as another key step to be mindful of.  It is amazing how the dough comes together.  I used an overnight rest in the refrigerator after placing dough in the dusted banneton's, and placed in large plastic bags.  The next morning had the loaves outside of fridge for 20 minutes while heating two dutch ovens at 500 degrees then lowering to 450 once placed in oven.  The loaves did not stick as one step is to dust the bottom of the dough before flipping into the dutch oven. The loaves popped right out after cooking.  No need for parchment paper, this was a great tip as I had trouble in the past with loaves sticking. In summary: 1) strong starter build 12 hours, refreshed twice and build to 20% of flour weight 2) gentle stretch and fold every 30 minutes for four hours, being gentle the last two hours 3) 30 or 40 minutes bench rest after pre-shaping loaves 4) Gentle tightening of final loaves with a dough scraper (like the pizza guys use to scrape the counter) achieving almost a skin like cover holding the dough into the underlying ball shape by cupping hands and pulling dough towards you. 5) My preference for overnight proofing in fridge, adds nice blisters and very slight and subtle tartness 6) Hot oven, I used 475 degree pre heat of oven and dutch oven/combo cookers - he states 500 degree preheat and bake at 450 degrees.  No steam required as sealed dutch ovens solve that. 7) Dust the bottom of the loaves so when you flip them into the dutch oven/combo cooker, the bottoms do not stick 8) Twenty minutes covered at 450 followed by 25-30 minutes uncovered.  I baked until internal was 210 degrees vs. the 215 he states in recipe.  Internal dough was moist, a nice almost gelatinous but cooked shine inside. The basic recipe is also used on several other breads besides walnuts; herbs, olives, and more are in the book.  Will try his olive bread next  with herbs and some lemon zest.  Glad I pulled this one off of the shelf and wish I had done so sooner. Nickisafoodie
I was looking through cookbooks for inspiration and found this recipe in Vanessa Kimbell’s The Sourdough School - The ground-breaking guide to making gut-friendly bread. I altered the ingredient list slightly by adding yogurt and changing the hydration. She uses a whopping 83% so I reduced the water since I really didn’t feel like dealing with goop. My final hydration was 73%. However, this doesn’t account for the water/beer retained in the spent grains. I also increased the salt and the levain slightly, and used my usual dough making procedure. As to finding the spent beer malted grains, I sent a message to the local brewery that provided the stout for last week’s bread, and they let me have spent grains at no charge! Bonus!!! Since I have a couple extra loaves this week, I think I’ll drop off a loaf as a thank you. Recipe Makes 3 loaves Dough: 700 g strong bakers unbleached flour 300 g fresh milled Einkorn (300 g Einkorn berries) 700 g water 30 g yogurt 22 g salt 200 g spent beer malted grains (Sleeping Giant Brewery) 200 g sultanas 250 g of 3 stage 100% hydration levain (procedure below) Wholegrain flour as well as unbleached flour to feed the levain Two mornings before: Take 2 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 4 g of filtered water and 4 g of wholegrain flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: Feed the levain 20 g of water and 20 g of wholegrain flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 100 g of filtered water and 50 g of wholegrain flour as well as 50g of strong baker’s flour. Let rise until doubled (about 6 hours). Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: Mill the Einkorn berries on the finest setting of your mill or measure out ready bought whole grain Einkorn flour if you don’t mill your own. Place the required amount of the Einkorn flour in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. Cover and set aside. Measure the spent grains and sultanas. Mix together and refrigerate. Dough making day: When ready to make the dough, take the spent grains/sultanas mixture and the levain out of the fridge to warm up before being used in the dough. Using a stand mixer, mix the water with the flours, and mix on speed 1 until all the flour has been hydrated. Let this autolyse for a couple of hours. Once the autolyse is done, add the salt, the yogurt, and the levain to the bowl. Mix on speed one for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on speed 2 for 9 minutes. Add the spent grains and sultanas to the mixing bowl, and mix on speed 2 until they are evenly distributed. This will take a couple of minutes. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds (coil folds) at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. This particular dough rose quite quickly and was ready 45 minutes after the last coil fold. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~800 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the top of the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle a  mix of rice and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. They baked up nice and dark!
I was thrilled with the wild rice cranberry & nut bread I made last weekend so I decided to make another fruit/nut loaf. I didn't add rice this time, but I upped the percentages of whole grain. I briefly thought about adding cooked spelt, but then I forgot. I did a 10% starter inoculation, but I split this between YW (50g flour and 50g YW left out for 20 hours) and 100g of sourdough starter. My YW had a great apple smell. I used 2% salt and the hydration was 84%. The higher percentage of whole grains made the dough pretty easy to work with even at 84% hydration. I also did a 3+ hour autolyse which is longer than I have done in my recent bakes. I added 150g toasted walnuts, 200g raisins/cranberries, and 40g honey.
I previously made the turmeric and leek loaf from Sarah Owens and it remains one of my tastiest loaves. I decided to make it again, but to follow my own process with the dough, to up the hydration to 80%, and to change the mix of flours. I hope it's as tasty as the first time! One of my loaves has a small tumor on the side because it was too big for my DO and it stuck to the side as I put it in - oops!
Friday, Oct 25, 2019. 7:33 pm. Mixed 650 g of home-milled Prairie Gold flour, hard white spring wheat, 36 gram unrefined granulated cane sugar, 559 g bottled spring water. 86% hydration so far. 8:30 pm. Folded in 10 g home-milled malt flour (purchased malted wheat berries from a brewer's supply), and 27 g of Bob's Red Mill Dark whole-grain rye flour. Total flour so far: 687 g.  81.36% hydration so far. Autolyse time: 1 hour. (7:33 pm to 8:33 pm.) 8:33 pm. added 194 g of 100% hydration starter. (97 + 97)  Flour in starter is a mix of whole wheat pastry, whole grain rye, and Prairie Gold.  Total flour: 784 g. Total water: 656 g.  83.67% hydration so far. 9:45 pm.  Stretch and fold. 9:47 pm. Folded in 14.9 g Himalayan salt, dissolved in 14.5 g water. Total water: 670.5 g. Final hydration: 85.52%.    --- Total weight: 1469.4 g = 3.2 pounds. Percent Prefermented Flour:  97 / 784 = 12.37%.   Miscalculated a bit. I was intending to get 14%. 10:22 pm. Stretch and fold. 10:55 pm.  Fold, shape, dust with whole wheat pastry flour and white rice flour, put in banneton, put in fridge. Bulk ferment time: 2 hours, 22 minutes.  (8:33 pm to 10:55 pm.) Sat, Oct 26, 2019. 8:06 am. Take out of fridge, to warm up. 9 hours, 11 minutes cold ferment. 9:34 am set oven to 470/450 F.  (First number is oven setting, second number adjusts -20 degrees for actual.) 10:22 am. Put in combo cooker, in pot part as base, score, put in oven covered, 450/430 F. 15 min. Additonal warm-up/ferment: 2 hours 16 minutes.   In hindsight, should have left in fridge, and started oven warm up at 8:06 am. 10:37 am. Still covered. 430/410 F.  15 min. 10:52 am. Uncover. 400/380 F.  52 min. 11:44 am.  Take out. Internal temp 208.9 F. Close enough. Total bake time: 82 minutes. Got just a little oven spring. Not as much as previous bake.  But it tasted better. Even though hydration was a little less, it was just as moist. The sugar apparently helped the taste and maybe helped to retain moisture. Next time: more malt flour, more autolyse, less final ferment, no warm-up.
10-29-2019. 6:45 pm.  Mixed: 480 g home-milled, coarsely ground Prairie Gold hard white spring wheat, HWSW, grown by Wheat Montana. 3 g malted flour, Rahr Malted Red Wheat, home-milled, coarse, from whole grains purchased at brewer's supply. 36 g home-milled, coarse, Kamut. Initial flour: 519. Initial water: 412 g.  Initial hydration during autolyse: 412/519 = 79.38% 7:55 pm. Mixed in levain:  (Original culture from Carl Griffith's 1847 Oregon Trail Sourdough Starter.) 164 g levain, at 100% hydration. = 82 g flour + 82 g water. total flour = 601 g.  total water so far = 494 g. hydration so far: 494 / 601 = 82.19% Percent Prefermented Flour: 82/ 601 = 13.64% 9:15 pm. Mixed in salt and water: 11.2 g salt.  11.2 / 601 = 1.86% 13.0 g water. Total water = 507 g. Final hydration: 507 / 601 = 84.35% 9:45 pm. Stretch and fold. 10:07 pm. Stretch and fold. 10:40 pm. Fold, shape, dust, put in lined banneton dusted with rice flour.  Cover in plastic bag. Put in fridge. Bulk ferment time: 7:55 pm - 10:40 pm = 2 hrs 45 minutes. Total weight: 601 g flour + 507 g water + 11.2 g salt = 1119.2 g = 2.46 pounds. 10-30-2019. 9:15 - 9:30-ish am.  Pre-heat oven and combo cooker to *495/475.   15" diameter baking stone is on the rack below the rack where combo cooker sits. 10:12 am. Load onto pot (not skillet/lid) of Lodge 3.2 qt cast iron combo cooker. Bottom of pot is lined with parchment paper on top of corn meal. Score. Cold proof time: 10:40 pm - 10:14 am = 11 hrs 34 min. 10:14 am - 10:29 am. Bake covered at *475/455 F.   15 minutes 10:29 am - 10:44 am. Bake covered at 420/400 F.  15 minutes. 10:44 am. - 11:28 am. Bake uncovered at 400/380 F.  44 minutes. Total bake time: 74 minutes. Internal temp at 11:14 (after 30 minutes uncovered) = 208.6 F. final internal temp = 209.5 F. * Oven thermostat is off by 20 degrees. 1st number is my oven setting, 2nd number is actual. Got some oven spring, but still not as much as I want. Final weight of loaf after 2 hour cool: 915 g.  915 / 1119.2 = 81.75%.   Reduction = 18.25%.
Given my real passion is sourdough, it is odd that my first forum post and subsequent blog entry are centred on the topic of gluten-free baking. This one is for a friend. I am not an expert in gluten-free baking (or baking, for that matter), but this procedure has worked out rather well for me. So I'm going to go through the whole thing - right from making the starter, which is still going strong after 2 weeks of use, and one refrigeration in between. The recipe itself is Laura T.'s Overnight Sourdough Rice and Teff Baguettes, with some substitutions and ranges for acceptable fermentation times. I will admit that I have not achieved the degree of open crumb as she, even after testing over the last two weeks. I remain hopeful. *Note: I am a scientist by trade with quite a bit of bench-top experience. I find accuracy quite necessary for molecular biology, but stressful. Therefore, I've got a bit of a how-far-can-I-deviate-from-the-recipe approach to baking. I provide ranges for ingredients and time where possible. My household has concluded that the best way to enjoy this loaf is at least a day after baking, toasted with butter. Some of us prefer it over other certain glutinous breads. Week 1: Making yeasty water Add water, sugar, and dried fruit to a bottle, mix and leave it for a week. There might be bubbles that show up at the top and that is good. Mine did not, and it still worked. Day 8: Making the starter Day 9-12: Strengthening the starter (You might consider reserving the "discard" for things like pancakes, or incorporation into other breads.) Day 13 morning: Prepare starter for baking This step does not really differ from the above. It just ensures you have enough starter left over to keep it going. Day 13 evening - Day 14: Assemble the loaf Maintaining the starter Mix ingredients together daily to keep the starter alive for a total of 45 grams. Thus far, I have had no trouble re-activating this after refrigeration. I recommend feeding and letting it rise for 5-8 hours before putting it in the fridge. The proportions are what matter here (and what makes this a "100% hydration starter") but I find that lower volumes do have a small negative impact on starter activity. This starter is generally a lot less active than my rye starter.Pretty good crumb.Quite pretty.
I've been experimenting with a new bread machine and gluten free.  And it hasn't turned out too badly so far.  There's a series I'm going to keep up until I feel like using the bread machine has become "routine" at https://www.nixgluten.com/2019/10/the-great-gluten-free-bread-machine.html There's also a part 2 so far.  Here are some pics from the experiment. Cinnamon Raisin bread: Shrinkage over 90 min after baking I'm breaking all the rules of using a bread machine and exposing both success and failure.  Comments are welcome here or there. My goal is to stop paying thru the nose for gluten free bread, which I need. Update Recipe Ingredients: 1 cup Namaste flour, gluten free, organic (this is the starchy flour) 1 cup Bob's Red Mill Almond Flour  (Not Organic, I can't afford that, heh) 1/2 cup  BRM buckwheat  groats, ground in a coffee grinder  until it's flour 1/2 cup flaxseed, divided in two parts and ground 2 Tbsp chia seed 2 Tbsp psyllium seed powder 1 and 1/2 cup water and 2 tsp salt in a large bowl 3 eggs  1/2 cup water (warm) 3 heaping tsp sugr 2 1/4 tsp yeast Steps: Combine warm water, yeast and sugar and stir.  Allow to become slightly frothy.  This time I didn't let it form a thick "head" because I just wanted it awake. Prepare the "gluten free sponge" by combining half of the flax seed, the chia seed and psyllium powder with the 1 and 1/2 cups of water and salt.  Stir vigorously until some bubbles are incorporated. Beat 3 eggs into it. Measure the flours and have ready. Place paddle in bread machine. Add the warm water/yeast mixture. Add the conditioners/gels mixture. Add the flour mixture.  Set machine on Dough Cycle and watch at first to be sure it combines properly.  Help the machine mix if needed.  If remembered, remove the paddle after the second mixing, and before the second rise gets going. If the dough has risen to the top edge of the pan by the end of the Dough cycle, you may proceed to Baking the dough with the "Bake" cycle.  Allow the bread to stand for at least 1 hour, best is 3 hours.  Then slice and enjoy! I wrap the bread in cloth for one day, then store what's left in Tupperware in the fridge. Believe it or not, there's still room for improvement in this loaf. It fell because it formed a popover type of top. That's cute in a pastry but not so cute in bread.
Something for a Halloween dinner. Another sourdough loaf tied with string and baked in a Dutch oven. Use an almond or pecan for the stem.  Serve it with eyeball soup (tomato soup with mini bocconcini combined with stuffed green olives). An olive and rosemary roach as garnish. Bread recipe here: https://zestysouthindiankitchen.com/pumpkin-sourdough-bread/
This is my favorite bread in the world! What's your favorite? And here's some strussel topped banana corn muffins😋Happy Halloween!
There are many reasons why I want to make a bread machine work in my life.  I've baked bread the long way and I love to do that. But my spine no longer wants me to stand up straight, and I get winded just walking the length of my house.  Kneading is fun and I love it, but it hurts now.  Bending over is a roulette of dizzy spells.  So having something on my counter that requires no reaching for parchment paper and pans, no preheating of oven and bending over to load/unload it, no kneading, etc... that's helpful right now.  When/If I recover, I'll go back to something more active. There's another reason. People with Celiac disease already have enough issues with food.  Why make them go through the ritual of baking the long way when a machine could actually fulfill the duty with only a small loss of quality?  Gluten free bread is around $8 a loaf right now, near me.  It can be as much as $11 if it's an "artisan" loaf.  I've paid $15 for a local baker's truly wonderful loaf of gluten free bread.  I don't begrudge anyone the profits, but I can't do that forever. Hardly anyone can. And there's another reason still.  As people get older, the chances of latent Celiac genes becoming active increases.  In the US, 1 in 133 people has Celiac already active. But that says nothing about how many people have the genetics.  And because it's one of those things that activates, the elderly are the largest group of people with Celiac.  The elderly have the greatest need for gluten free, yet they can least afford it.  And the difference between baking bread the long way and using a bread machine could make the difference for someone. And another reason:  Not everyone tolerates xanthan gum.  But if you eat gluten free, it's hard to avoid it.  Only by baking for yourself can you fully avoid it. So having a decent bread machine is important to a certain group of people.  That's why I'm dedicated to finding a way to get along with a bread machine, even though it does things like you see in the image above.  I literally couldn't find any advice for that sort of problem anywhere.  I puzzled it out by watching youtube videos until I saw someone do what I did and realized why that crater had formed.  But it should never have formed at all. I think people deserve better equipment than this.  I ended up kneading that dough by hand and that's the whole purpose of having a bread machine in the first place.  I don't expect artisan results, but I do expect that I can at least avoid the kneading part if I buy an appliance designed to do that. And maybe it's a pipe dream, but I also expect a decent manual that tells you the timings of  the kneading and rise portions of each cycle, so you can plan what you want to use. The full blog entry is here: https://www.nixgluten.com/2019/11/the-great-gluten-free-bread-machine.html
I baked Maurizio’s sourdough Pain de Mie today. Based on his recipe and recommendations I made a 700 g dough to fit in my 8.5” x 4.5” loaf pan, however, it came out rather small, I’d say it could easily have been 800 go for that size. Anyhow, as per his recipe it is all white flour, 12% butter unsalted, 7% honey, 22% milk, 48% water, and 2% salt. https://www.theperfectloaf.com/pain-de- See what I mean, it is rather short and squat for sandwich bread. How much dough do you guys use for this size of pan?  What it underproofed or just not enough dough? I’ll post photos of the crumb tomorrow once I cut it open. Benny
I’d been warehousing another Abelbreadgallery creation since our incredibly able Abel published this on TFL in Jan 2018.  And yesterday finally decided to give it a go.  At 75% hydration, this is near the upper end of my non-ciabatta type of bread limits.  Considering the length of time in retard and the growth of the loaf, both in retard as well as in the oven, I'm surprised at the tight crumb for a 75% hydration dough.  Nonetheless, a delicious slice of bread. Being alfanso, I had to tinker just a tad with the outcome and rather than duplicate his boule and xusco (batard in Catalan).  I tried to emulate his xusco and used the remainder for two wheat bran covered baguettes.  Somehow I think that the wheat bran interfere with clean scoring on baguettes.  Or maybe it’s just me. Abel's Xusco And mine.  A fair representation, so I'm satisfied at the look and outcome.  The baguettes shaped nicely, but seemed to have a mind of their own in the oven. 750g x 1 xusco 340g x 2 baguettes/long batards The formula normalized to 1000g
Frallor are a small single-serving bread typically eaten as a breakfast sandwich here in Sweden. They have become a part of my bread rotation because they are easy to make as an everyday loaf. After I moved to Sweden, I had bought Martin Johansson's Bröd, Bröd, Bröd book and he has a number of variations on frallor. I'm not the best at following directions and often add my own influences to breads which has been fun to combine with the base frallor recipe since it is easy to adjust in a variety of ways. The photo above was from my most recent batch of frallor. The rough base I follow is: Mix until incorporated. Let stand for 8-10 hours, Shape by folding the dough into an envelope twice and then cutting into 9 parts. This usually results in more square like frallor than the one pictured above. Let rise for an hour, heat the oven to 250 degrees celsius and bake for 15-20minutes. I like to use Dinkel / spelt wheat as part of my frallor when I mix in cheese. This variant was: I tend to make these before I leave for work, leave them out in our warm apartment, and then bake them in the evening.
This is a batch of wet dough from which I usually make 4 to 5 flat breads.  Tip o' the hat to Jeffrey Hertzberg and Zoe Francois: https://www.amazon.com/gp/offer-listing/0312649940?tag=froglallabout-20 I bake these on a cast iron griddle or pan or skillet in my toaster oven.  Either a Lodge 9.25" round handle-less serving-griddle/plate, or a Lodge 10.25" cast iron pan with 2 loop handles which fits diagonally, or a Lodge 8" cast iron skillet with a regular long handle.  I use the 10.25" pan or 8" skillet if I want to cover it with aluminum foil, which I sometimes do when baking a thick flatbread, such as bannock. I mixed this in the 4 liter plastic tub which will be stored in the fridge. 443 g total, if I added right, 1/2 tsp of Guar Gum. 2 tsp of instant yeast. 8.9 g hickory smoked salt.  2% of 443. 386 g water, but I added more later.  I neglected to weigh the water that I added later, but the total would be at least 90% hydration, likely more. You need enough moisture to keep from forming a dry skin on the dough mass when it's in the fridge for a few days. To bake, I pull out a handful of dough, and stretch/form it out by hand to a 7" to 9" circle, depending on what I want in terms of size, and what baking vessel I'll use.  Sometimes I cook it right away, sometimes I'll let it come up to room temp, sometimes I'll let it proof until mealtime. Baking temp is 400 F.  375 or 350F for thicker breads.  I use both top and bottom elements (TOAST) setting to  pre-heat the toaster oven, but then select only the bottom element (BAKE) for the bake. I have only one rack for the oven, but there are two rack positions available. I bake it on the upper rack.  It's a cheapy Ambiano brand from Aldi. The heating elements have aluminim guards on them.  I place a 9" round cordierite baking stone directly on the guards over the lower elements so that the baking vessel does not get much direct radiant heat.  WIthout the baking stone for "shade", the bottom of the bread browns up too fast and too dark. It takes about 14 minutes per side, 28 minutes total. I tasted too much guar gum in this batch.  Either that or the hickory smoked salt doesn't bake well.
Just a simple loaf.
I've been making baguettes every weekend for two months now. I pulled all stops in this round, I made a poolish and did a 22-hour cold retard. I'll write up my entire process when I have time since I know that'll help people give me more targeted feedback. For now though I'd really appreciate some feedback on my final product and my technique for sealing the seams. The recipe I used was basically the 68% hydration KAF classic baguette recipe, but with a 22-hour cold retard before shaping and baking. They were baked seam-side down for 10 minutes at 450 ˚F with steam and ice-cubes, then for 14 minutes at 450 ˚F with convection. The results These are my best baguettes yet, they had the best flavor and crispiest crust. However, I don't think they had enough oven spring and the crumb is definitely too tight. Sealing the seam I think I sealed the seam pretty well (see video and pictures below). I baked all of the baguettes seam-side down but they still split along the sides, so I was wondering how I could still improve on this. Let me know what you think! It's a little long so I recommend watching at x2 speed.
Hey there! I recently had a 'disaster' in my baking pantry and found moths in my folded up couches!! I have since washed (ugh) and ironed them - but how do I protect them from this happening again? I have traps now (gross) and all is well - but I'm afraid if I stick them in plastic or something it might get 'stale'? Thanks so much for any advice! SSCISME
670g King Arthur bread flour 7g instant yeast (I prefer Dr Oetker brand, but it has no hechsher) 2tsp table salt or fine sea salt 5 eggs, one of them divided 1/4 cup mild honey 1/4 cup canola oil or similar 3/4 cup cold water Sesame and/or poppy seeds, untoasted (optional) Combine flour with yeast. Lightly beat the four eggs and the yolk. Add other liquid ingredients and stir until honey is dissolved. Add liquid ingredients to flour mixture and stir well with a spoon to combine. Let rest a few minutes, then knead in salt and continue to knead for a while longer. Lightly oil bowl and dough, cover well, and refrigerate overnight. In the morning, perform a stretch-and-fold. When near ready to bake, remove from the refrigerator and leave out for around an hour and a half. Divide dough into six pieces. Flatten each and shape into a cylinder. Let rest a bit, then roll into strands, letting each rest as needed. Braid into two loaves, cover loosely but well with oil-sprayed plastic wrap, and let rise until puffy. Toward the end, preheat oven to 350F. Lightly beat remaining egg white with a pinch of salt. Brush over the loaves. If desired, sprinkle with sesame and/or poppy seeds. Note that the seed density will decrease in baking due to oven spring, so use a heavy hand here. Bake around 24 minutes, until the interior reaches a temperature of 165F.
I've been able to bake some pretty nice breads over the past dozen years or so. I give lots of credit to my oven which provided predictable, accurate and evenly distributed heat. It also retained humidity well when set to conventional baking. But it died. That oven was installed 23 years ago. The KitchenAid folks told me the expected life span of a current production oven is 10 to 15 years. That seems short to me, but I've been told so many times by various appliance sales and repair people that, literally, "They don't make 'em like they used to." Anyway, after consulting Consumers Report and a trusted appliance sales person, I ended up replacing my old KitchenAid convection oven with the current model of the same oven. It has a few differences, but most of these seem to be improvements to me. Nonetheless, any new oven needs to be tested and, I believe, requires some adjustments in procedures to achieve optimal results. I'm still learning the idiosyncrasies of this oven, but it seems capable of baking good bread. My first bake was Jewish Sour Rye. This was baked on a pizza stone with my usual oven steaming method. And, today, I baked a dozen sandwich rolls made with the "Medium Vienna Dough" from "Inside the Jewish Bakery." The rolls took a long time to brown. I am not yet sure whether the oven temperature was lower than my setting or the oven needs longer to pre-heat after it reaches temperature or I need to place the oven rack lower for conventional baking in this oven.  More tests are called for. I can do that. Happy baking! David
After some dispiriting failures (the Paul Hollywood organic apple starter, the Pineapple Juice solution), I have three new contenders: George Greenstein's rye sour, Maurizio Leo's rye starter, and Chef Rachida's interpretation of Kristen's starter from Full Proof Baking. Hopefully one of them will thrive. I'm pretty sure I'll be baking Jewish Rye Bread tomorrow--although that bread is not sourdough. Once I get a viable starter, I'm shooting for the moon. I've seen such wonderful posts lately that I cannot wait to get going. I have plans for rye, ancient grains, and trying spelt to see if my daughter who's wheat intolerant can stomach it. If not, I will eat it!!!
I made babka a month or two ago using a combo of instant yeast, sourdough starter, and yeast water. This time around I decided to follow an actual recipe! This is 100% sourdough babka using the recipe for the dough from Artisan Bryan. I didn't use his fillings and instead did two babkas using a baklava-type filling (walnut, pistachio, almond and rose water) from Smitten Kitchen and one using a chocolate and nut filling. The Artisan Bryan recipe also calls for all bread flour, but I did 8% whole wheat and 15% spelt. The babka is definitely more flavorful than your average, but I am not sure how I feel about the tang. I might use YW next time.
Hi All, I have a barely used Electrolux Assistent, maybe used 4 times and hyper cleanly maintained and stored.  It is white. I can post more pictures if there is interest. Its is basically brand new, with all the basic attachments intact + the mixer unit for milk shakes, ice crushing etc.  Works great and can handle mountains of dough without issue. I was planning to ask $350 on amazon/ebay. Shipping is negotiable. Saro
During baking there was a nice oven rise but it shrinks by the end of the baking time.  I'm guessing it's because of water loss. This bread recipe is gluten free and I've read before that the shrinking of bread after baking happens a lot more in gluten free bread making.  I've never seen anyone explain why this is, though.  It just is. If this was a wheat bread and this happened, what would be the reason?  Too much yeast?  Too much water?  I'd like to do what I can to minimize it.  Maybe if I added bean flour?  I have some mung beans that I could sprout, mash and add to a bread recipe. Here's the size of the bread after complete cooling, and the crumb structure (which is really nice for a GF bread).  The recipe is here:  https://www.nixgluten.com/2019/11/substantial-sandwich-bread-recipe-part-5.html
Just rye and sunflower seed, to go with the smoked salmon we got this weekend About 85-87% hydration Very simple bread I want to get a perfectly square bread pan for just rye bread but this pan is a no brainer when it comes to proofing rye. 850g of dough, risen all the way up to the rim and bake, always right and never collapsed!
My first bake with this year's organic grain harvest CSA share from Cedar Isle Farm - an Oat Rye Sourdough - sprouted oats and rye, rolled oats/cracked flax soaker, sifted bran and sesame seed coating.
7th TFL Bake, Nov. 6, 2019. 452 g Prairie Gold, HWSW, home-milled coarse. 134 g Kamut khorasan wheat, home-milled coarse.   (586 g flour so far.) 1/4 tablet of 500 mg vitamin C. 473 g water.  Initial hydration: 473 / 586 = 80.7% Mix at 10:55 am. Autolyse time: 2 hrs 10 min. 1:05 pm. Add 190 g Levain, at 100% hydration.  Levain is mish-mash of BRM dark rye, BRM WW pastry flour, PG, Kamut, white rice flour, and about 1 tsp each of BRM 1-to-1 GF flour, maltodextrin, dextrose, and dried malt extract.  I was running late on building up the starter into a fresh levain, so I added the sugars to hurry things along. Flour so far:  586 + 95 = 681 g. Water so far: 473 + 95 = 568 g. Hydration so far: 568 / 681 = 83.4%. Percent Prefermented Flour, PPF: 95 / 681 = 13.95%. 1:42 pm. Stretch and fold. 2:28 pm. Stretch and fold. 2:53 pm. Added/folded in 13.3 g salt (1.95%) semi-dissolved in 20 g water. Final hydration: (568 + 20) / 681 = 86.3%. Final weight:  588 + 681 + 13 = 1282 g = 2.82 pounds. Bulk ferment:  2 hours, 40 min.  (1:05 - 3:45) 3:45 pm. Passed window-pan test. Folded and rested. 3:55 pm. Dusted and put in floured (50/50 white rice flour and WW pastry flour) and lined banneton. Room temp proof: 1 hour, 12 min. ( 3:45 - 4:57) 4:57 pm. Put in fridge. 7:57 pm. Pre-heat oven to *495/475.   (First number is oven setting, second number is actual.) Cold proof: 3 hours, 54 min. (4:57 - 8:51) Total proof: 5 hours, 6 min. (3:45 - 8:51) 8:51 pm. Bake in combo cooker, pot as bottom, skillet as top, covered, 470/450, 15 minutes. 9:06 pm. Still covered, lower temp to 430/410.  16 minutes. 9:22 pm. Uncover, lower temp to 420/400.  14 minutes. 9:36 pm.  Still uncovered, lower temp to 400/380.  27 minutes. 9:58 pm. Internal temp: 209.5 F.  Put back in oven. 10:03 pm. Took out. Temp still 209.5 F.  Call it done. Total bake time: 1 hour, 12 minutes. (8:51 - 10:03) --- That Vit C really made a difference, giving a good balance of extensibility to elasticity of the dough. And allowed that to occur at a lower hydration so that it did not take too much time to bake off the moisture. I credit the Loafers in general, and DanAyo in particular, in encouraging me to precisely measure and record hydration, to use 14% prefermented flour, and to try out vitamin C. --- Not a big oven spring, not an impressive bursting score line, but it finished baking in 74 minutes, ten minutes quicker than previous bakes, probably because of less water to cook off. I'm still going to have to experiment with autolyse, bulk ferment, and final proof times, in order to get better oven spring. More importantly, the crumb, while not Instagram-worthy, was still light  and airy enough, that a non-baker would not guess that it was home-milled near 100% whole-grain. --- I've also come to learn that you can't skimp on salt with 100% whole-grain.  I was trying to go low-sodium with 1.6% salt.  But 2% salt is needed for dough development when using near 100% whole grain. --- I've also concluded that Kamut doesn't go well with hard white spring wheat, in terms of taste.  So I'm going to try mixing in some hard red spring wheat, instead of Kamut, for flavor.  And then try a separate loaf of 100% Kamut.  I do like Kamut for flat breads, which durum is known for.  Kamut is very very close to durum, genetically, and in baking characteristics.
Possibilities for a World Series international Community Bake? https://edition.cnn.com/travel/article/world-50-best-breads/index.html
.We attend an annual Thanksgiving reunion, and I usually bring the bread -- adapted to whatever the menu is.  Often the menu is comprised of the foods people grew up with in Northern Europe just after WWII, and the breads were the country breads of the time. This year, it is a more refined menu, calling for a more refined bread. Each year, I put some effort into selecting the right bread, and refining my technique. This year it is a yeasted bread, 33% freshly milled whole wheat and 66% bread flour, with small amounts of olive oil and dry milk added
Hi, I've been making baguettes every weekend. This is my fifth attempt, I made a blog post about my last one as well. I finally made one loaf I'm happy with. I took some advice I got from Alan and Dan and handled the dough more gently, let the dough autolyse before kneading, portioned the dough out before the cold ferment, and baked at 470 ˚F. I also watched some of their videos and kneaded the dough (this time 72% hydration) with 200 french folds. I still didn't get enough oven spring for 2/3 baguettes. I think the main culprits might be 1. underdeveloped gluten, 2. over-handling the dough during shaping (I just can't seem to roll the dough out long enough without squishing it), 3. shallow scoring, and maybe 4. under-proving? Do you agree that these are my main problems? I'd love some feedback on how I can improve. I'm not having my old problem of the loaves bursting at the seams or the sides, so at least there's progress on that front. Photos Finally one good baguette! Cross section of one of the flatter loaves, crumb is close-textured but the crust was light. Baguette on the top is the one that rose the most beautifully in the oven. It looks pillowier than the rest here, probably because I shaped it first and let it rest the longest. You can also see that it's the shortest loaf, that's because I didn't roll it/squish it as much as the others. Ingredients I've basically been modifying the KAF classic baguette recipe, at this point its only vaguely like the original. I've been sticking to this recipe just because I don't have a miligram scale for yeast and repeating and modifying one recipe is a good way for me to keep track of what changes I'm making. Poolish    113 g cool water    1/16 tsp SAF instant yeast    120 g KAF AP flourDough    All of the starter    1 1/2 tsp SAF instant yeast    274 g lukewarm water (for 72% hydration)    418 g KAF AP flour    1 1/2 tsp salt Steps
After a long absence it was time to get back to baking.  My starter stoically withstood the deep chill of neglect in my fridge and as is always a surprise to me came back to life with great vigour after a few feedings.  I liked the look of Tartine's Danish Rye and gave it a try. Dark seeded rye breads have always intrigued me. The recipe called for sprouted rye kernels but my lack of good timing and impatience had me use them just after a single night's full soak rather than fully sprouted. The other difference from the recipe was that  it calls for buttermilk and dark ale, and I replaced the buttermilk with more dark ale - I used Guinness.  I also had a hard time finding a dark malt syrup at the grocery store and ended up going to a home beer making supply store and bought some there. I baked them this morning and cut into them tonight. Wow. All wet ingredients.. A bowl full of seeds.. When combined it was pretty wet and liquid. Within an hour it began to "set" as the seeds started to absorb the liquid. The recipe calls for several stretch and folds. That's not possible with this dough as it's too wet. And as we're not after gluten development I think it was more just to help all the liquid get absorbed. Over three hours I mixed the dough three times and kept the dough warm in a proof box at 83 degrees. Then they went into the pans for another hour at 73 degrees. I then covered them with a dish town and placed them in the fridge for the night. In the morning I baked them for about 1 hour and 45 minutes to get the loaves to an internal temp of 208 degrees. In the picture above you can see the loaf top looks a bit pale. As called for in the recipe I brushed the loaves with a bit of water before placing them in the oven - maybe I didn't brush them enough? I'm not sure how to fix that. I'm very happy with the bread! It's moist but not wet. It has a great firm mouth feel but isn't hard to chew. I have two questions if anyone knows: #1 how do I get a nicer looking top crust? and; #2 I didn't use it but what's the purpose of using buttermilk in a recipe like this? Thanks - frank!
This bread was a real experiment! I had some apples from the farmer's market that I wanted to use, hard apple cider, and apple YW. I had also wanted to make another bread using oat porridge so I decided to do it all taking inspiration from the idea of apple/raisin oatmeal. This bread uses 5 different flours, oat porridge, sourdough levain, YW levain, raisins, hard cider, and grated apple. I kept the hydration at 55% because I was worried that the dough would turn to soup with all of the liquid from the oats and apple. The oats were not cooked, but were soaked overnight in the hard cider. The bread is about 40% whole grain.
1:?? pm.  Initial mix, no measuring, just by eye. Prairie Gold, Kamut, ground chia seed, 1/10th of a 500 mg vitamin C tablet, no salt yet.  About 1.5 hours autolyse. 3:05 pm. Added 160 g of 100% hydration levain. Still no salt. 3:45 pm. Stretch and fold. 4:05 pm. Folded in 11 g pink Himalayan salt. 6:08 pm. Folded, dusted, put in lined banneton.   About 3 hours bulk ferment: 3:05 - 6:08 pm. 1233 g final weight, 2.72 pounds. 8:19 pm. Pre-heat oven to *495/475 F.   Also pre-heat the Lodge 3.2 qt combo cooker. https://www.amazon.com/Lodge-Cooker-Pre-seasoned-Skillet-Convertible/dp/B0009JKG9M?tag=froglallabout-20 6:08 - 9:06 = about 3 hours final proof. 9:06 pm. Bake covered at 475/455.   15 minutes.  Put dough in pot part, with skillet as lid, scored. 9:21 pm. Still covered, lower oven temperature to 420/400. 15 minutes. 9:36 pm. Uncover, set temp to 400/380.  25 minutes. 10:01 pm. Take temp: 210 F. Done!  Thumps nicely. Final weight: 1103 g.  2.43 pounds. Total bake time: 55 minutes.   * =  First number  is oven setting, second number is actual temp. Let sit overnight in a paper grocery bag. -- About 8:00 am, cut open.  Not as much rise as I had hoped for.  I probably did not let the starter develop enough after feeding, or should have used more starter.  Crumb is tender, just the right amount of sponginess, not too dense. Plenty of small holes, Approximately 50 mg of vitamin C worked fine.
I wanted to see how kneading time can affect the openness of the crumb. My hypothesis is longer and vigorous kneading will contribute to less open crumb, holding everything else equal. Using the same starter, same recipe, formula, weight, tools, etc., the only difference was the kneading part (and the number of stretch and folds). Recipe was adapted from the Perfect Loaf (https://www.theperfectloaf.com/sprouted-buckwheat-sourdough/), but I made a few modifications. I substituted half dark rye flour and half barley flour for buckwheat flour; cracked wheats, rye chops, and rolled oats for buckwheat groats. Following the two-hour autolyse, I kneaded the doughs separately two ways. Bulk fermentation lasted for four hours, and rested at room temperature for an hour after shaping before putting in the fridge. I lowered the hydration level to 82% because I was not confident in handling high hydration doughs. 1. Slap and fold lightly by hand for 12 minutes. Coil fold during bulk fermentation 4 times. 2. Kneading by hand (slap and fold) vigorously for 25 minutes. Stretch and fold during bulk fermentation 3 times. Compared to the dough from the first experiment (less kneading), the second batch was more workable and stronger. After the second stretch and fold, I felt it was almost impossible to do another (did it anyway). Although I tried my best to control for the factors other than kneading, I accidentally left the bread (#2) in the oven few minutes longer that I burnt the bread. Overall, I liked the less opened crumb (#2) better. The crumb was so soft and moist. I don't fully understand but I think it was tastier and had more flavor than the open-crumb one (#1). It was a fun experiment! Next time, I will try to use different autolyse duration to see how it affects the crumb.
50%whole stoneground einkorn, 50% bf Lazy overnight version, turns our pretty good Pretty low hydration about 68%, I literally did 2 sets of mixing and that's it
Will be starting sourdoughs again as it’s cooling off. This Italian boule came out great
Hello, Having issues with tartine sd . I live in Tampa fl, so I am careful with the amount  of h2o. I am following the recipe in the tartine bread book The dough is very difficult to form for first forming. Any and all help is greatly appreciated.
I'm going to be in Sydney from the 18th of November before a cruise starting 22nd  around New Zealand calling at Dunedin 27th Nov , Akaroa 28th, Wellington 29th, Napier 30th , Tauranga 1st . Auckland 2nd  and the Bay of Islands 3rd Dec. back to Sydney for  3 days  5th.6th and 7th flying back to Perth Sunday the 8th. If there are any TFL folk that might like to catch up for a chat and a coffee lets see if we can make it happen. Kind regards Derek
Whole wheat cycle 3 lbs dark crust  + 45 min baking cycle (207 *F baking alarm) For oven baking:  the equivalent is baking at 350*F for approximately 1 hour 45 minutes.  100g ground flax seeds   2/3 cup 50g chia seeds                 1/4 cup 40g collagen                   1/4 cup ----  190g "GF soaker" flours total, about 1 1/3 cup ------------% soaker flour: 22%  (of total flour) 115g coconut flour            1 + 1/3 cups  250g Namaste flour         2 cups 150g almond flour            1 + 1/2 cups 150g ground buckwheat   1 + 3/4 cups ---- 665g  total dry flours, about 6 2/3 cups  ----------  855g  total all flours 15g salt 14g 2 packets Instant Yeast, mixed into dry flours 70g sugar  ---- these don't count toward liquid or flour 150g water 2/3 cup  , heated in microwave 30 sec, to mix with sugar 690g water, 3 cups, to mix with "GF soaker" flours 200g eggs 4 large 70g oil 1/4 cup 20g vinegar 2-3 tsp ---- 1130g all liquids Hydration:  132%  !!!  (I can hear baking pans falling to the ground all over the Midwest.)               I pushed the hydration all the way to 169% which is close to the hydration of a "levain" but the result is longer and longer baking time without any visible benefit. It doesn't ruin the bread but there's not much point in it either.  Grind flours that need it (flax, buckwheat) Measure and combine flours, with salt and yeast. Measure and combine soaker ingredients.  Add 690g warmed water (about 110*F) and mix very well. You may need to use a food processor if it clumps up.  Beat some air into it. Beat eggs, oil and vinegar together.  Warm  the water for 30 sec in microwave. This is to hot for yeast, but it will cool when it's mixed with the other ingredients. For instance, in this recipe, you don't need to warm the eggs. When the liquids mix together, they will be just lukewarm. Assemble the paddles in the bread machine pan.  To avoid spills, fill the pan with all ingredients except 1/2 of the flour mixture while it's out of the machine.  Start the cycle and add the rest of the flour in batches over the next 5 minutes.  When needed, help the machine to mix.  Once the bread is mixed, this recipe doesn't have many other problems, except baking time may need to be extended. Use a thermometer with an alarm for best results, it may take a long time to get the bread up to 205*F or higher. =========================== Ideas and suggestions welcome :)
Nobody warned me and I didn't see any labels regarding this when I bought flour and basic baking equipment. They really should have...... Last night I told my housemate that I had been feeling really strange all day. I have various medical conditions relating to childhood cancer, so straight away he offered to take me to hospital. My reply was and what exactly  do I tell them ? I'm an addict with withdrawal symptoms..... The weird look on his face was quickly replaced,  and accompanied by loud laughter as I explained I hadn't baked any bread that day and really missed kneading. I AM AN ADDICT , and it has only been 3 months. I am mostly housebound, a wheelchair user and  I love crafting.  I have discovered baking bread  is just another craft and gathering supplies, books, watching videos and reading forum and FB group posts is just as addictive. I home educate my youngest , soon to be 12 year old daughter, and she is so chuffed to be able to make a loaf from start to finish by herself. We normally bake side by side and have found baking to be filling all sorts of curriculum requirements both on food education and science .  We have even found ourselves repeating the mantra, " Glutenin and Gliadin " as we knead, lol.
Some things are worth repeating.  Horst Bandel's Black Pumpernickel from Jeffrey Hamelman’s Bread is solidly in that camp. We had arranged dinner with friends who will move away soon. During that conversation, I offered to make a bread for them as a going away gift.  Since they enjoy dark, hearty breads, I knew a rye bread was in order.  It took a while to peruse various recipes in several books but Bandel's pumpernickel kept drawing me back. This is a bread with a lot of moving parts.  Rye berries are soaked overnight and then boiled.  There’s an old bread soaker.  Rye meal forms the basis for a rye levain.  And if that isn't enough rye, there's also cracked rye in the final dough. Before making the bread, I dug back through the TFL archives.  One of the most important finds was Andy's (ananda's) advice that the final dough should be about 85% hydration.  Hamelman is uncharacteristically vague about the water content of this bread, so that was a helpful data point. The other iffy part of the instructions for this bread is the baking profile.  Hamelman baked this bread in the dying heat of a commercial oven in his bakery.  There really isn’t a way to replicate those conditions in a home oven.  More about that later. This past Friday evening, I began by milling the rye meal and the cracked rye with my Komo Fidibus grain mill.  My starter was already primed for action after two refreshments, so it was mixed with the rye meal and water and left to work overnight.  The altus was combined with warm water to form a soaker.  Finally, the rye berries were covered with water. On Saturday morning, the rye berries were boiled for an hour, then drained and cooled.  I also wrung as much water as possible from the altus soaker.  After that, it was time to put everything together.  There was just one small concern: the retained water in the rye berries and the altus pushed the overall dough hydration to 97%. Since I was making two loaves (hey, I like it too!), I used my 7-quart KitchenAid mixer.  While it had enough power to handle the load, the extra water in the dough made it very sticky and caused it to cling to the sides of the bowl.  In effect, it received more of a massage than mixing.  I found it necessary to use a spatula repeatedly to shift the dough back toward the center of the bowl where the dough hook could grab it.  Even so, I found some dry flour in the bottom of the bowl at the end of mixing and had to work that in manually. After the short bulk fermentation, the loaves were shaped and placed in Pullman pans.  When the top of the loaves were nearing the top of the pans, lids were put in place and the pans deposited in the preheated oven.  Because the dough was wetter than recommended, I chose to not seal the pan lids with foil.  I wanted that extra water to bake off. The baking profile I adopted was an educated guess.  The first hour was spent at 375F, per Hamelman's recommendation.  The second hour was at 325F, the third hour at 275F, and the next five hours at 225F.  Then the oven was switched off at about 10:00 p.m., with the bread remaining in the oven for the rest of the night. The pans were still slightly warm when I took them from the oven at about 7:30 Sunday morning.  Upon opening the pans, I found that the loaves had pulled away from the pan walls, slightly.  There was quite a bit of condensation on the inside of the lids and the pan walls.  Since I wanted to drive off some of the water, that was a welcome sight.  The crust was quite firm but not rock hard as happened with one of my earlier bakes.  I placed the loaves in plastic bags immediately after removing them from the pans.  The risk was that too much moisture would be retained.  The reward was that the crusts would soften. It was Wednesday before I cut into one of the loaves.  It is very moist and gums up the knife blade but fully baked. The flavor and fragrance are marvelous.  That long slow bake converts some of the starches to sugars and then caramelizes those sugars.  In the process, the grayish dough turns a deep mahogany brown; not quite black but close enough.  The crumb is barely aerated and packed with chewy, plump rye berries.  This is seriously good bread. Our friends were delighted with their loaf.  And I am delighted with mine. Paul
I'm really loving purple bread!  I've made a similar bread a few months ago, but this time I decided to also add freshly ground purple corn.  I also used Kamut instead of the previously used Spelt. I was very happy with how this turned out.  The crumb was semi-open, nice and soft and flavorful.  This one is a keeper and worth trying if you dare. Here are the Zip files for the above BreadStorm files. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.   You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours  and the sweet potato with 90% of the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, olive oil, salt and the balance of the water and mix on low for 5 minutes.   Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 1.5 to 2 hours.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 540 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  Bake for 25-35 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. Below is the nice moist and colorful crumb.
Despite only moderate success with my previous squash loaf, I decided to try again! I upped the hydration to 65% this time (not including liquid from the squash). I roasted the kabocha squash and pureed it and incorporated so that the dough was 40% squash, 2% salt, 70% organic stone-ground T85, and 30% KAF, 20% levain. I also added a bit of honey. During the lamination, I turned half of the dough into squash/walnut/raisin/cranberry and the other half into squash/cumin/coriander/chipotle chili powder rolls. I'd never made rolls before and I'm also getting used to baking in such a cold kitchen. The bulk went for 5.5 hours, but perhaps I should have pushed it longer. I'm also hoping I baked the rolls for long enough. These are definitely some rustic looking rolls!
Hi, so this is my 6th round of baguette baking. Overall, much much better oven spring and crumb than before. I think the next big thing to work on is my scoring technique. I documented the process pretty meticulously this time, so let me know if you spot anything I can improve on. Thanks! Recipe is at the bottom of the post. Photos French folds number 90-100. My weighing scale turned off while I was measuring the water so the dough probably ended up around 76% hydration, I don't think this negatively impacted the outcome and I like playing with high hydration dough anyways. Gluten development was o.k. I did 300 french folds and 4 S&Fs spaced between 20 minute intervals. Windowpane could've been better but the crumb turned out fine so maybe it doesn't matter. Portioned out for 20 hr cold ferment. Dough isn't super smooth. A misstep? After the cold ferment I took the dough out of their containers warmed them up for 1 hr. Initially I had just let them fall out of their boxes and rest like that (see smaller image). But I realized I was losing a lot of bubbles, so I did one gentle letter fold to each dough. The consequence of this fold is that the dough was already really elongated by the time I did the final shape, so I only did one fold during the final shaping before rolling them out. I thought this was a mistake, but it might've actually contributed to the openness of the crumb. Only needed one fold for the final shaping. Means the skin of the loaves weren't tight enough, but that I could minimize handling which helped the openness of the crumb. Post final 50-minute proof. Feedback please? Post-scoring. This is probably my worse scoring yet haha. The dough was more hydrated and bubbly than in previous rounds so I really struggled. Experimented with doing just one long score (far right), which actually turned out to be my best, probably mostly because it was the deepest and most angled. Final product. Baked these at a higher temperature for an even shorter amount of time. Oven preheated at 500 ˚F, baked with steam for 10 minutes at 470 ˚F, then steamed removed and baked for a further 10 minutes at 470 ˚F with convection. By far my best crumb yet. This isn't even the loaf with the one long score above! Some scores didn't open up as much. Ingredients I've basically been modifying the KAF classic baguette recipe, at this point its only vaguely like the original. I've been sticking to this recipe just because I don't have a miligram scale for yeast and repeating and modifying one recipe is a good way for me to keep track of what changes I'm making. Poolish    113 g cool water    1/16 tsp SAF instant yeast    120 g KAF AP flourDough    All of the starter    1 1/2 tsp SAF instant yeast    274 g lukewarm water (for 72% hydration, probably added more)    418 g KAF AP flour    1 1/2 tsp salt Steps Conclusions Everything bolded above is a step that I've significantly changed since last time. I basically used a higher baking temperature, an additional S&F, let the dough warm up for longer, and a different order of shaping steps. I think I will actually keep this shaping sequence- doing a letter fold immediately after cold ferment and before the 1 hr bench rest- as it helped with the crumb. Things I need to work on include gluten development and scoring (I think).
Hi Everyone.. we're going to see a friend for dinner this weekend and I'm going to bring dessert. But it's complicated.. I need to bring something that is vegan, gluten free, has no dairy, peas, corn or wheat.. I could pass and bring a salad but figured that someone on the board has an idea..  I thought I could make a toffu based cream cheese pie and make a non-gluten free graham cracker crust, but any other ideas?  I've never done that before an am not sure how good the toffu cream cheese would taste.. Thanks.. frank!
New experiment. Soaked chickpea coarsely blitzed in a food processor, fermented with some starter for 20 hours before making the dough.
I’ve been away for the last couple of weeks due to an impromptu trip to Oklahoma City for a horse show and then another trip to Las Vegas where my daughter ran her second half marathon. She did amazing finishing well in the top half even though she hadn’t trained for 5 weeks due to an arthritic flare. It feels good to get back to baking. A friend requested a loaf with whole grains. So some oat porridge, some Fed Fife, some Einkorn with a touch of honey and butter! Recipe Makes 3 loaves Porridge 100 g rolled oats 200 g water 45 g honey 40 g butter Dough 700 g unbleached flour 200 g freshly milled whole grain Red Fife flour (200 g Red Fife berries) 100 g freshly milled whole grain Einkorn flour (100 g Einkorn berries) 50 g flax, freshly ground 700 g water 23 g salt 30 g yogurt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) Extra wholegrain flour of your choice for feeding the levain Two mornings before: Take 2 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 4 g of filtered water and 4 g of wholegrain flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: Feed the levain 20 g of water and 20 g of wholegrain flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 100 g of filtered water and 75 g of wholegrain flour as well as 25 g of strong baker’s flour. Let rise until doubled (about 6 hours). Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: Mill the Red Fife and  Einkorn berries. You can sub out any type of berries that you can get your hands on like Spelt, Durum or Kamut or hard spring wheat. Place the required amounts in a tub. Add the unbleached flour to the tub. Grind the flax seeds in a bullet and add to the flours in the tub. Cover and set aside. Dough Making day: Early in the morning, take out the levain to warm up. I usually give it a good stir at this time. Put 700 g filtered water in a stand mixer’s bowl and add the flours from the tub.  Mix on the lowest speed until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes a couple of minutes. Autolyse for at least a couple of hours at room temperature. Make the porridge: Add the water to the rolled oats and cook on low until water is absorbed and porridge is creamy. Add the butter and the honey. Stir until well distributed. Once the autolyse is done, add the salt, the yogurt, and the levain to the bowl. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed for 7 minutes. At the end of the 7 minutes, add the porridge and mix another 2 minutes or until incorporated. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds (coil folds) at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. This took about another half hour. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~800 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and cross over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle a  mix of rice flour and all purpose flour in the bannetons. I also sprinkled some rolled oats as well. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. Yum!
Hi - I am new to this forum and breadmaking but I have just acquired a Morphy Richards 48220 breadmaker.  The instruction manual explains really well about the different types of yeast and states that all the recipes use the active dry yeast and not the quick rising type. I purchased some Allinson's dry active yeast (see photo) but the instructions on the Allinson can (100g) say that the yeast has to be activated un warm water before use and is not suitable for bread makers. Consequently my first attempt at basic white bread using the recipe in the manual is a disaster as the dough didn't rise. What type of yeast do others use successfully in this type of breadmaker please? thanks
Visiting Altamura's two famous bakeries (Oct 2019) I first read about Daniel Leader's experience in Altamura about a year and a half ago.  So enchanted by the rich history of Altamura's DOP bread that I said that I had to go to Altamura whenever I visited Italy. My husband and I were only going to be in Altamura for less than a day so we visited the Forno Antico Santa Chiara after 6pm on the day we arrived. In retrospect that was not a good time since they were no longer baking. We purchased a small loaf of their DOP bread for 2.5 euros plus a bag (1.5 Kg) of their semolina flour (Semola Ramacinata Grano Duro) for 4 euros. Interesting to note that all exterior signage read " Forno Antico Santa Chiara" while plastic bag and labels read "Anticuus Fornus Sancta Clara". Making Daniel Leader's Semolina Sandwich loaf with Altamura semolina flour I am sure that we were the only crazy tourists to lug semolina flour to two more cities by train before returning home to Toronto.  I decided that there was no way to recreate the Altamura bread without the actual mother and a wood fired oven. The next best option was to make Daniel Leader's Semolina Sandwich Loaf. Two semolina flours side by side, note that the Santa Caterina's has a finer granulation than the Santa Chiara's  which is probably why we detected a slightly lighter texture in the Altamura Santa Caterina loaf. The Santa Caterina bakery also charged a lower price for the semolina while the Santa Chiara seems to be now geared to the tourist population charging a higher price for both bread and semolina. Unlike other baker's results, my loaves did not rise as high as anticipated. As well during the mixing, the Santa Chiara's dough was too wet. I added a little flour at the very end  before rising as I did not know how long it would take for the semolina to rehydrate. Both loaves were very moist but a bit heavy. I remade the loaf again with the Santa Chiara semolina and reduced the water to 250g, doubled the yeast to 2 tsp and replaced the olive oil to partially melted butter (personal taste). The dough texture was perfect after mixing for 8 mins. The Altamura semolina definitely needed the higher amount yeast.The result was much improved with  a moist loaf with still some denseness. All three sandwich loaves had a sweet, slight cornmeal note. Texture great on the first day especially warm and firming up after. It would all come down to personal preference for texture. For a sandwich loaf, I would anticipate that more people would prefer it lighter. I shared some of the Altamura semolinas with a friend who has also been using it. My future experiments with semolina flour in other recipes will be with durum atta which is easily accessible to me .  I will likely replace 40% of the semolina with bread flour. All in all,we had some wonderful memories of the beautiful town of Altamura and its historic bakeries.
I bought a boatload of spelt berries and have been using them bit by bit in all of my bakes, but I decided to try a loaf that was 45%+ whole grain using 25% spelt, hard red winter wheat (Redeemer) and rye. I tried the Full Proof Baking method of making two separate doughs, one whole grain and one white, and then laminating them together. I also divided the dough into 2 loaves during the lamination stage, which Full Proof Baking recommends. I've always divided during the shaping stage. For the whole grain dough, I did 95% hydration with 4 hour autolyse and for the BF I did 80% hydration and 1 hour autolyse. It was only 69 degrees in my kitchen so I let the bulk ferment go for 6 hours. Maybe the crumb could be a bit more open, but the flavor combo of the flours is really outstanding! I have two questions I am hoping my TFL friends can help answer: 1) As in the loaf on the left, I get a nice ear and rise, but then my loaf will also split on the top of the loaf. Is this a result of poor shaping? 2) I recently bought a Mock Mill and when I mill the spelt, the flour feels pretty fine but I still get some big pieces of bran. Can this be avoided or am I going to need to sift them out? Thank you! T85 15% Redeemer Red Winter Wheat 5% Spelt 25% Rye 5% Bread flour 50%
After my last attempt I decided to reduce the autolyse time and see if it helped.  I made 2 x 600gm loaves - one had 1 hour autolyse, the other had 2 hour autolyse.  I withheld 20 gms water in both and found this made a huge difference.  I did 100 SLAFs, rested 5 minutes then added salt and did another 100 SLAFs. I also shortened the rest periods between folds to 30 minutes - 1 fold before lamination and 3 afterwards.  Bulk ferment took in total six and a half hours for loaf 1 (1 hour autolyse) and 7 hours 40 minutes for loaf 2 (2 hour autolyse). Both loaves were shaped and left on bench for 30 minutes then retarded overnight. Next day my bake started a little later than usual as I had an 8:15 appointment so overnight retard was about 14 hours. Baked at 240 deg C for 16 minutes in closed DO then lid off for another 16 minutes. Top image is loaf 1. Loaf 2. Still getting to grips with my new oven and would have liked a bit more colour. Crumb shot loaf 1 Crumb shot loaf 2 Side by side comparison Looking at the side by side comparison, I think 1 hour autolyse (lower loaf) is better with my flour although I may try again another time.  Much happier with the crumb this time and dough seemed to have more strength to hold its shape. It is a lovely bread and will get baked again I think. Bake happy everyone Leslie
I started out to make Ru's seeded sourdough which I love.  I ran out of levain (didn't calculate properly) so added in the left over from the first refreshment of the refrigerated starter.  I am not sure how much water I added to it to thin it from 66% hydration - a dumb move as it was quite thin when I used it. 12 midday - toasted 15 g chia seed, 37 g sesame seed and 22 g flaxseed. I had blitzed sesame and flaxseed a little in the coffee grinder. I then added 55 g water but it sucked it all up so I added another 55 g water and left to soak. 12:15 pm Autolyse 245 g flour, 50 g wholewheat flour freshly milled, 28 g freshly milled rye and 4 g gluten flour with 198 g water.  I amended the water amount because of the extra with the grain but it was too dry so just went with what it should have been. 13:30 I added the seed soaker and 90 g 100% levain. I did 100 SLAFs and dough just wouldn't come together.  Far too wet! This was my oops, too much extra water.  Thinking about it I realised that in the past I have added seed soaker when I did the autolyse!!  I really don't know where my head was that day.  What shall I add to soak up the excess?  Oh, how about some oat bran, got a packet of that!  So I worked in 20 g oat bran and did 30 more SLAFs before adding 7 g salt.  This was followed by another 130 SLAFs and dough felt really good! 14:15 pm one set of coil folds. 14:50 pm one set of coil folds 15:25 pm one set of coil folds 16:00 pm final set of coil folds and dough was left to bulk ferment. 19:00 pm dough had risen about 50% so preshaped and left for 25 minutes 19:25 pm final shaping followed by 30 minute bench rest and retarding at 19:55 pm Baked the next morning after 14 hour retard in a preheated DO for 15 minutes at 240 deg C with lid on and 18 minutes lid off. Managed a small ear! Crumb shot Really really happy with this loaf, lovely nutty flavour.  My oops correction worked out really well so I may add some oat bran again in future. It feels good to be starting to bake a bit more again. Leslie
Goals: 90% whole grain, 1 kg of dough,  88% hydration, 1.9% salt, 10% pre-fermented flour. Nov 28, 2019. 6:05pm, intitial mix:  363 g home milled Prairie Gold HWSW, 65 g home milled Kamut, 50 g King Arthur unbleached all-purpose flour 11.7% protein, (478 g flour so far), 394 g water, 15 g vital wheat gluten, 1/8th tablet of 500 mg vitamin C. (Just now noticed that I did not include the VWG in the total flour.) 7:09pm, folded in: 109 g of 100% hydration levain.  Was fed previous day, and two days before that, and spent the last 24 hr in fridge.  Levain is a mish-mash of King Arthur unbleached AP flour, Prairie Gold, and BRM whole wheat pastry flour. Flour now: 532.  Water now: 448.  Hydration now: 84.2%. Assuming 18 g AP flour in the levain, and the rest is whole grain, then whole grain percentage is 87.2%. 7:39pm: stretch and fold. 8:09pm: added 20 g water and 10.1 g salt via stretch and folds.  Was too aggressive and tore the dough some. Note:  need to up hydration to at least 90%. Flour: 532 g. Water: 468 g. Hydration: 87.97%.  (Update:  only 85.55% counting the VWG.) Total weight: 1025 grams, less what stuck to mixing bowl, plus flour used for dusting, and what adhered from banneton. 8:45pm: shaped, dusted with mix of  rice flour, AP flour and WW pastry flour, put in lined/dusted banneton, covered and into fridge.  Should have bulk fermented more, but wanted to get to bed. Nov 29, 2019. 9:21am: warmed up oven and Lodge 3.2 qt combo-cooker dutch oven at 495/475*. 10:23am: Lightly coated inside bottom of pot (not the lid/skillet) with avocado oil, dusted it with corn meal. Dusted seam side of dough ("up" side as it sat in the banneton) with corn meal. Placed a circle of parchment paper over the corn meal on the dough.  Inverted the cast iron pot over the banneton and rotated them so the dough plopped into the pot.  Made a shallow X score on top of the dough ball in the pot. Note: as it was too under-fermented, and likely under-hydrated, scoring should have likely been deeper. 10:27am: start bake, covered, 475/455* F.    15 minutes. 10:42am: reduce oven thermostat to 430/410* F, pot still covered.  15 minutes. 10:57am: uncover, reduce oven thermostst to 400/380* F.  50 minutes. 11:47am: Remove from oven.  Internal temp = 210.7 F. Total bake time: 80 minutes.  (30 min covered, 50 min uncovered.) * First number indicates oven thermostat setting, second number is actual temp according to a <$5 oven thermometer. --- 1:27pm: cut open.  Crumb not very open, but open enough and light (not dense) for a 90% whole grain loaf.  Taste is not as good as previous bakes, probably due to insufficient bulk ferment, and not using any rye flour.
Got some lovely oven spring and good crumb with this 80% sprouted whole spelt loaf (70% hydration). Very pleased how this turned out. I mixed the dough up around 6:30 pm -- no complicated process, I mixed everything together all at once. Let it rest for about an hour, then performed four stretch and folds in the bowl every half hour over the next two hours. Let it bulk overnight on the counter [14 hours total from initial mixing to pre-shape], pre-shaped, bench rested for 10 minutes, shaped, proofed for 1 1/2 hours in a banneton, and baked in a clay baking vessel at 475 F for 30 minutes with the cover on, 12 minutes with the cover off. I thought it was a bit too dark (burned) when I pulled it out, but the crust is crusty in a good way and the interior is tender. It's mildly tangy/sour. Ingredients: 474 g sprouted whole spelt flour 106 g bread flour 370 g water (70%) 11 g salt 60 g 100% hydration whole wheat starter 2 Tbsp agave syrup
It’s time to bake Xmas loaves for my group but this year, I decided to bake only one kind and since wild rice with cranberries seems to be the most popular, this was it! This is the same recipe as here: http://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/61462/wild-rice-sourdough-cranberries%C2%A0 However, for some reason the dough was moving super slowly so I gave it an extra coil fold and let it rise until it hit the 30% increase mark. Then the next morning, it looked like the loaves needed more proofing so I let the first batch sit for a half hour and the second batch sit for an hour while the first batch baked. They turned out very nicely so the old adage of watch the dough not the clock turns out to be so true!
I made a similar version of this bread a while ago and it came out great.  I wanted to change up the flour a bit and swapped out the whole wheat in the original formula with Kamut and some potato flour. I also used Greek yogurt instead of the original ricotta cheese. I was very happy with the end result on this one.  It's one of the tastiest challah breads you will ever eat. Download the BreadStorm File here. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.  You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk, plus the ricotta and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.    Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours, egg yolks and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, butter, honey and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes. Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 30 minutes.  Remove the dough and shape as desired. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 515 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 450 degrees.  (I lowered the temperature for the last 15 minutes to 425).  Bake for 35-50 minutes until the crust is nice and brown and the internal temperature of the bread is 205 degrees. Take the bread out of the oven when done and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating.
I made this before using Eric's instructions here: https://breadtopia.com/couronne-bread-ring/ Today I used a recipe and method according to Eric Kayser. I think it's this book  (The Larousse Book of Bread ). The method is somewhat different but the result nonetheless appealing. Tom
I'm a professional baker, recently moved to Thimphu, Bhutan. Used to achieve perfect croissants with beautiful honeycomb back in Mumbai, but despite multiple attempts, I'm just not getting the same results over here. Below is a full breakdown of my recipe and method, please tell me where I'm going wrong. Bread flour (White Swan brand) 1000g Sugar 110g Yeast (Instant dry) 15g Gluten 12g Bread improver 15g Salt 20g Honey 15g Butter 200g Water 440-450g (depending on humidity and dough consistency) I make my dough, rest it for 30 mins, divide into 1kg blocks and freeze for about 4-5 hours, till it's the right consistency for lamination. For each 1kg block, I use 330g of unsalted butter (my only option for the butter is a local one, the other butters I get are all salted), which has been shaped into a slab and chilled. After enclosing the butter, I do one single fold and rest the dough in the freezer for 20 mins to firm up. Then I do another 2 single folds for a total of 3 single folds, giving me 27 layers of butter. I used to do 1 single, 1 double earlier, but found I'm getting better layers and texture with 3 singles. Once laminated, I freeze the block for use the next day. The following day, I let the dough thaw out at room temperature, roll to 5mm thickness (my dough sheeter is ancient and destroys my dough if I try going any thinner). I've tried rolling it even thinner by hand after this, but the dough just resists too much, even if I rest it in the chiller in between. I cut my croissants with a 7cm base and 18cm length, dust off any excess flour, stretch the triangle a little, notch the centre of the base and roll up the croissants. d This  is done by 6pm on day 2. The shaped croissants then go into the chiller. My night shift staff pulls the croissant out by 2am, and leaves them in the switched off proofing chamber. On day 3, I come in by 6am, by which time the croissants are seemingly perfectly proofed. I use an egg wash, and bake at 190°C for 18 mins, then switch off the heating and let the croissants "dry" out for 2-3 mins. The croissants get a beautiful oven spring in the first 9-10 mins of baking, and subsequently they start to slowly deflate till they reach the shape you see in the picture. I used to bake at 220°-230°C in Mumbai, but out here at that temperature, the croissants get colour way too quickly and the insides remain raw. The one on  the left is rolled to the absolute thinnest I can manage on my dough sheeter, around 4mm maybe, and the one on the right is hand rolled, doesn't go below 5-6mm. So clearly the thickness does contribute to the problem, but as you can see, even the thinner one has a doughy bit in the centre. Are there any other parameters I need to change or is it just the thickness that's the source of all my problems? And yes, I'm trying to source a good quality "French-style" or "dry butter" but will that make a difference?
Well today I made a simple 1:2:3 loaf with some wholewheat (17%) and spelt (8%). my objective - test baking in my new BBQ instead of in the oven over summer.  Just a standard 123 with a little extra water, 4 sets of coil folds. here is my set up I read up on how to do this, so the BBQ got to 475°F in 10 minutes so I reduced heat and put my 2 DOs in for another 15 minutes and watched temperature gauge, turning off thr 2 centre burners.  Popped the slashed loaves into the DOs spritzed them and returned to BBQ. watching the temperature fall, when it got to 375°F or 180°c I opened lid briefly and turned the middle burners on again. Turned them off once the temperature returned to 200°C.  after 15 minutes removed DO lids and baked another 15 minutes. After about 5 minutes I checked the bottom of the loaves only to find them burnt. I removed them from DO and propped them up against each other and continued the bake. the loaves didn’t brown as much as I usually get in my electric oven but after an extra 7 minutes internal temperature was 209°c plus so I took them out. Interestingly, my enamelled steel roaster over the cast iron plate but on a rack, burnt more than the enamelled cast iron roaster on the clay tiles over the open grid. will see later  tonight how the crumb is. Question:  yes it worked BUT I don’t want burnt bread so how do I modify my method to stop this?  yes I fiddled with the burners, turning them on briefly to keep temperature up but would it have been better to just let temperature drop and bake for longer? HELP - all ideas welcome, I am an absolute newby in BBQ cooking, so all ideas very welcome. Leslie
Holiday bread gifts.  Basically a 1-2-3  rye,ww, bread
10th TFL bake. Dec. 2, 2019. Goals: 1200 g boule, all but 30 g flour to be whole grain.  90% hydration, 2% salt, 10%  pre-fermented flour, levain at 100% hydration.  30 g store-bought quinoa flour for flavor, 30 g King Arthur All Purpose flour for helping with crumb stucture, 100 g coarse home-milled Kamut, the rest coarse home-milled Prairie Gold Hard White Spring Wheat. Levain to be mostly Prairie Gold, based on Carl's 1847 Oregon Trail Sourdough culture.  Use 1/8 of a tablet of 500 mg vitamin C ~ 62.5 mg vit C, which worked out to 100 parts-per-million of the flour, about 3 times what is called for, but I was too lazy to sub-divide the tablet further. Levain was fed yesterday, and again today.  It orignally was a mish mash of flours, but these two feedings were home-milled PG only.  I was pressed for time, so I added 1/2 tsp of dry malt extract (maltose) to the levain when I last fed it, in order to hurry it along. 1200 g / 1.92 = 625 g flour.  -  - -   625 * .90 = 562 g water. 625 * .10 = 62.5 g flour in levain,  so also 62.5 g water in levain.  Total levain at 100% hyd = 125 g. 625 * .02 = 12.5 g salt. 625 g total flour - 62 g flour in levain = 563 flour to mix. 562 g total water - 62 g water in levain = 500 g water to mix.  minus 15 g hold back #1 , minus 30 g holdback #2 = 455 g water. 563 g flour to mix - 30 g quinoa flour - 30 g KA AP flour - 100 g Kamut flour = 403 g Prairie Gold. 11:58 am: Mix: 403 g PG, 100 g Kamut, 1/8 tablet vit C, 455 g cheap bottled spring water.  Let the coarse milled grain soak 1 hour 35 minutes. 1:33 pm: Fold in: 30 g store-bought quinoa flour, 30 g KA AP flour, 125 g room temp levain, 15 g hold back water #1. 2:22 pm: Fold in: 12.5 gr salt, 30 g hold back water #2. 3:06 pm: Stretch and fold.  Then left to go shopping. 4:46 pm: Stretch and fold. 5:35 pm: fold, shape, put in dusted lined round banneton, 8" inner diameter at rim.  Used rice flour, KA AP, and BRM WW pastry for dusting, 5:46 pm: the boule was near proofed at fold/shape stage, it was a fast ferment, so I put it in fridge covered in plastic grocery bag. 6:51 pm: pre-heated oven to 495/475* F. 7:30 pm: Lightly oiiled the inside bottom of the deep part of a Lodge 3.2 qt combo cooker.  Sprinkled corn meal on the oil. Sprinkled and lightly rubbed corn meal on the up side (seam side) of the boule in the banneton.  Covered the boule (still in the  banneton) with an 8" diameter circle of parchment paper.  Inverted the oil/cornmeal coated pot over the banneton, and then flipped them over, dumping the boule into the pot.  Scored the boule with a razor blade, first a circle around the circumference as close as I could get to the side of the pot. Then scored  an X on top. 7:32 pm: bake, covered at 495/475* F for 5 min.  The rack below the rack holding the combo cooker has a baking stone to shield cooker from direct radiant heat of the oven's bottom heating element.  Both the baking stone and the combo cooker were pre-heated. 7:37 pm: reduce thermostst to 475/455* F, continue baking for 10 minutes. Pot still covered with skillet/lid. 7:47 pm: reduce thermostat to 430/410* F, continue baking for 15 minutes, Pot still covered, 8:02 pm:  Reduce thermostat to 400/380* F, remove cover. Baked for 41 minutes more. 8:43 pm:  Top of loaf looked done, so I decided to check internal temp of loaf.  210 F, perfect! Total bake time: 71 minutes. Got oven spring on  both the circumferential score, and both legs of the X.  Looks nice!  The expanded sections  in the opened score lines have that rough, brown and delicious look.  Will post photos when I get a new computer. Gonna wait until tomorrow to cut open.  Looks so good I called a neighbor-friend to show it off, but he was not available. I let it cool upside down for two hours, covered only with a paper towel, then I put it to bed overnight in a 1 gallon zipper seal plastic bag, propped up so the loaf was on its side.  The 1200 g (weight of raw WW dough) baked in the deep part of 3.2 qt combo cooker, with 8" internal bottom diameter, makes the maximum size loaf to fit uncut into the 1 gallon plastic storage bag. -- * First number is thermostat setting, second number is actual temp according to a cheapy oven thermometer.
Goals: 2.25 pound dough, 1027 g.  75% whole grain hard white spring wheat (Prairie Gold), 25% King Arthur All Purpose, 85% hydration, 10% prefermented flour,  2% salt.  Make a 88% hydration soaker with the coarse home-milled Prairie Gold, but not the AP flour. 1027 / 1.87 = 549 g total flour.     549 * .85 = 466 g total water.   549 * .02 = 11 g salt. 549 * .10 = 55 g flour in levain.   100% hydration levian :  55 g water in levain : 110 g total levain. Levain is all HWSW, Prairie Gold. 549 total flour - 55 flour in levain = 494 g flour to mix in. 466 total water - 55 water in levain = 411 g water to mix in. less 27 g water held back for salt = 384 g water for initial mix. 549 total flour * .25 = 137 g King Arthur AP flour. 494 g flour to mix in, less 137 g AP flour = 357 g Prairie Gold. 357 g  Prairie Gold * .88 hydration = 314 g water for soaker, --- 6:06 pm: Made soaker of 342 g Prairie Gold, 15 g home-milled Kamut (ran out of PG), 314 g water. (384 g water, calculated above for initial mix, less 314 g water in soaker = 70 g water needed at this stage.) 7:10 pm:  Mixed soaker, 110 g Levain, 137 g KA AP flour, 70 g water. Levain wasn't ripe, so added 2.7 (1/2 percent) of Instant Dry Yeast, 8:05 pm: folded in 11 g salt and 27 g water. Dough firmed up nicely, 8:50 pm: Stretch and fold. 9:45 pm: dough was ready, probably didn't need the instant dry yeast. folded/shaped, dusted, put it in a lined banneton dusted with rice flour and wheat flour, and put in fridge. -- Dec 5th, 2019. 7:28 am: slowly pre-heated oven. 495/475* F. 9:09 am: Dough was definitely over-proofed. Should not have added the instant yeast.  Put boule in pot part of Lodge 3.2 qt combo-cooker. Bottom of pot lightly oiled and sprinkled with corn meal. Seam side of dough sprinkled with corn meal, and covered with 8" diameter circle of parchment paper. Flipped into pot. Scored. Dough deflated a lot when scored, more evidence of over-proofing. Man, that Carl's starter is powerful. Definitely did not need to add the commercial instant yeast.  Note to self, reduce PPF from 10 to 8 percent. 9:12 am: Bake covered, @  495/475 F, 10 minutes. 9:22 am: Bake covered, @ 475/455 F, 10 minutes. 9:32 am: Bake covered, @ 430/410 F, 11 minutes. 9:43 am: Uncover, bake @ 400/380 F, 30 minutes. Did not get good oven spring. 10:13 am: take out, internal temp = 207 F.  Put back in, bake @ 400/380 F for 10 more min. 10:23 am: take out, internal temp 208.8 F.  Good enough. Total bake time 71 minutes. * First number is thermostat setting, second number is actual temp. -- Let cool 2 hours. Cut and ate some. Nice and soft, definitely less dense than my normal 90-100% whole grain loaves.  Crumb is still very good despite lack of oven spring.
With cold weather settling in I'm spending more time baking.  I decided to make some whole wheat bread inspired by Tartine's version. It has about 60% whole wheat, 10% whole spelt and 30% all purpose unbleached flours. It has about 83% hydration and I added 5% wheat germ. 10% levain was used and I overnight-ed the loaves in the fridge for about 15 hours. Baked at 450 for 20 lid on and 20 with lid off - great oven spring. The crust and crumb was nicely soft, have an earthy flavour to them and crisped up beautifully when lightly toasted.  I cut into them a bit early so the crumb looks a bit shaggier than it actually is - I'm very pleased with it.
This was a beet sourdough with 36% roasted beet, 25% Hard Red Winter Redeemer, 5% rye, and 70% KABF. The hydration was 70% + the liquid from the beets. I did a 2 hour autolyse and let the bulk go for 6 hours (kitchen was 64 degrees). The oven spring was fine, but maybe the bulk could have gone shorter. Interestingly I made a leek loaf simultaneously and those loaves had huge oven spring. Maybe the beets sped up the fermentation? The crumb isn't super open, but I think it's fair for a vegetable loaf.
One of my TFL friends expressed concern that I had not posted for awhile. I can reassure him and you all that I am well and baking as much as ever. The thing is I have settled on a few favorite breads (if "a few" is less than ten), and I have already posted about all of them at least once. This weekend I baked something old and something new, so I have an excuse to report that to which I have been up. Yesterday, I tried a new baguette recipe. For many years, I have used my San Joaquin Sourdough recipe for baguettes. And I can hardly remember the last time I baked "white bread." But the second edition of Jeff Hamelman's "Bread" has a recipe for "Sourdough Baguettes" I have been curious to try. So yesterday I did. This is an all white flour bread that is yeasted, but it has the addition of some liquid levain. The result is a good traditional baguette in every respect with an added flavor tone of mostly lactic acid tanginess. I made half a recipe using left over liquid starter which I had fed a couple days before. I froze one of the loaves. I think I made pretty good use of the other. For dinner: Sautéed scallops and a butter lettuce salad.  Delicious with baguette and an Anderson Valley Chardonnay from Navarro Vineyards. For Breakfast, French Toast with powdered sugar and sour cream. I know that's different, but it's the way my family ate it when I was a kid. For lunch, Onion soup with croutons and cheese. We are going to a pot luck tonight for dinner, so I baked a couple loaves of multigrain sourdough bread today. (One for the potluck. One for a neighbor.) I hope you all are having a happy and delicious holiday season! Happy baking! David
White with WW, Semolina and Rye
A staple of traditional Italian delis, it's surprisingly hard to find a quality recipe for Italian Prosciutto Bread online, also known as Lard Bread. This is a bread loaded to the brim with thick, cubed prosciutto, adding in parmesan and lots of black pepper for extra flavor, and brushed with prosciutto fat for tenderness and a beautiful gloss. While this is not a pretty looking bread by any means, it is uncontrollably delicious: you won't be able to stop eating it. This recipe is adapted from numerous others. Yield: 2 loaves. If you don't feel like spending $20+ on a pound of prosciutto, this recipe can be halved. Alternately, you can double it, because trust me, you'll eat it all. Ingredients: 650g bread flour 450g water 1.5 tsp instant yeast 1.5 tsp salt 1 tsp coarsely ground black pepper 16 oz. / 500g Prosciutto, 1/8″ thick, cut into 1/4-inch dice. Before dicing, slice off and save the largest pieces of fat (see step 1) 8 oz / 250g parmesan 3 tbsp rendered prosciutto fat (see step 1), bacon fat, lard, or melted butter 0) Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Add a splash of olive oil, then quickly fry the diced prosciutto. Remove the prosciutto to a bowl, then add the saved fat. Render the fat for 5-10 minutes, then save in a small bowl for later. (This step can be performed during the initial 7 minute mix if using a stand mixer). 1) Mix flour, salt, and pepper in a dry bowl. Add water to mixing bowl and stir in yeast. Mix in dry ingredients. 2) Mix for seven minutes on low speed, or knead by hand for 10 minutes. Mix in prosciutto and cheese, and mix for 8 more minutes. Dough should be slightly tacky but not sticky. If dough is too sticky knead in more flour a little at a time. If the dough is too dry, spray with a bit of water and knead. 3) Loosely shape dough into a boule and transfer into a clean bowl. Cover with plastic wrap and let ferment for 60 minutes, or until dough is doubled in size. 4) Split dough in two equal halves. Roll each half into an 18” cylinder and form into a ring. (Alternate: shape into batards.) Ensure the ends stick together and place on parchment paper or floured couche. Cover lightly with couche or plastic wrap. Let rise in a warm draft-free place for 60 minutes or until doubled. 5) Preheat oven to 450 degrees. Use a pizza stone or inverted baking sheet on a low shelf of the oven, and place a regular baking sheet for steaming on the lowest shelf of the oven. 6) Brush bread with about ⅓ of the melted fat. Transfer bread to pizza stone or inverted baking sheet in the preheated oven. Pour 8oz warm water onto the lower baking sheet for steaming. 7) Bake 15 minutes. Remove parchment paper and turn bread front to back to allow for even baking. Brush bread with about another 1/3 of melted fat. Reduce temperature to 425 degrees. Bake another 15 minutes, or until internal temperature of the bread reads 205F. 8) Turn off oven and leave bread in the oven with door propped open for another 5 minutes. 9) Remove bread from oven and brush with the remaining fat. Allow to cool but if you aren’t having company or bringing this bread to a function, this bread tastes delicious slightly warm and crispy. That's a lot of prosciutto 2oz pure rendered prosciutto fat Shaped and proofing Look at that shine!
After my first attempt to bake bread in my hooded BBQ I had several issues to address.  Most critical was the fact that the gas hose had touched the body of the grill and partially melted! So I ordered a new one and a second grate.  These arrived this week so yesterday I repeated the previous bake, substituting rye for spelt. 12 December - refresh starter and build levain before going to bed 13 December 08:25 am autolyse 105 g freshly milled whole wheat, 50 g freshly milled rye 440 g flour + 10 g gluten flour and 400 g water. 08:50 am Patted autolysed dough out on bench  and dimpled in 200 g 100% hydration starter, folded and did 120 SLAPs.  Rested 5 minutes, added 10.8 g salt with wet hands, rolled up and did another 120 SLAPs. Rested dough 30 minutes 09:45 am Divided dough into 2 and did one set of stretch and fold on each and left for 30 minutes 10:15 am Coil folds.  I had to go out at this point and it was an hour before I got back. 11:20 am Coil folds 12: 00 Final set of coil folds then left to bulk ferment. Visitor arrived about 1 pm 14:15 pm - no time to deal with this, dough had increased 50-60% so I popped it in the fridge. The day went down the drain just after this and it was 21:40 before I could deal with it again.  Took it out of the fridge, cold preshape and left 30 minutes. 22:10 pm Shaped and bench rested until 10:30 then retarded over night.  Don't know how this will turn out, never before left a dough so long. 14 December 08:00 am  Fire up the BBQ.  Here is my modified setup I decided to just use the deep part of my two "DO"s so these were inside the hood as well.  I turned all 4 burners on full until thermometer read 250 deg C then waited about 10 minutes before turning off the 2 inner burners.  I had my portable oven thermometer on the rack and it reached about 225 deg C.  I probably didn't preheat for long enough and I will do it longer next time. Removed dough from bannetons,  placed on large disposable aluminium sheet, slashed & spritzed both loaves and placed on the rack.  Closed the hood, set the timer then remembered I hadn't covered the loaves.  Opened hood, covered loaves with the 2 inverted DOs and baked for 12 minutes.  On removing DOs I was disappointed with oven spring but carried on.  Thermometer was reading fairly steadily 200 deg and my portable one had dropped to about 170 deg C.  I set timer for 18 minutes and watched.  the dough slowly puffed up more so in the end I am pretty happy with the amount of oven spring.  I felt dough wasn't quite baked at this point and Dough didn't brown very fast so I baked for an extra 15 minutes. It has turned a light golden brown. Internal temperature was 208 deg F I think the stones were probably not quite hot enough but at least this time I don't have burnt bottoms!! Yay! After lunch I cut loaves so whilst not particularly open I am reasonably satisfied - a little more fine tuning required though.  Crumb shots below So, a little pale for my liking but definite progress.  I am a little less scared of the process of baking in a hooded BBQ.  New hose & regulator are a little shorter and so all is safe and good there too!. Big thank you to @idaveindy for all the help after last bake and getting me pointed in the right direction.  A little longer preheating, maybe a little more heat in general may give me a better result.  The extra long fermentation may also have played a role too. Happy baking all Leslie
Mixed Dec. 14, 2019.  Baked Dec. 15, 2019. Mostly the same as #11, 75% home-milled whole grain (mostly Prairie Gold), 25% King Arthur All Purpose. But this time reduced levain to 7% prefermented flour.  3 hour bulk ferment, overnight in fridge.   Dusted in a combo of whole brown rice flour and ground chia seed.  Baked at same oven temps, but an extra 10 minutes, to an internal temp of 210.4 F. Did not get much oven spring, but crumb was still excellent.
Well, it’s a been a bit of time since posting.  Last night I had itchy fingers to go back to a favorite but with a pair of twists.  My most-favored sesame semolina based on Mr. Hamelman’s 125% hydration AP flour version.  However this time I subbed out the levain for my old favorite 75% mixed flour levain. As long as I maintain the same percent of preferment flour, switching things around like overall as well as levain hydrations is a breeze.  I also had the urge to make a Brobdignagian baguette/long batard to go along with one normal sized.  What could be normal than that? 1 x 1150g long batard/baguette, 1 x 375g long batard/baguette. itch scratched! And on to other recent things I had a desire to start to learn croissants and laminated dough.  So…many iterations later, I have somewhat cured the itch and figured out many angles to greater success. Starting with the still edible but quite problematic: poorly laminated with a lot of tearing and leakage, shaping issues, determination of "correct" size to make into the triangles, under-baked bottoms, etc.  And one by one, I started to incorporate a few different methods. With the help of watching a few videos over ad nauseam particularly Bien Manger. I won't go into too many details here, but settled on T45 pastry flour to cure minor elasticity problems and the T45 dough is also a tad smoother.  Went from 2% milk to powdered milk to whole milk.  Bought an appropriate large maple wood rolling pin 18 inches long.  Misunderstood that the 27 layers were not for the entire dough, but for the butter along, and so I needed to perform one more lamination step to get there.  Baby steps.  Much helped by my wife leaving town for a week so that I could spend a lot of time trying things out and searching for better methods and results. At this point, if there are two remaining items to check off, the more important would be that I’m still seeing only the initial image of a honeycomb crumb.  The second is that without a sheeter, it is near impossible for me to roll the dough out so that it is consistently smooth and even along the entire length of the dough.  A sheeter would make life all the more easy, but I have neither the space nor desire to get one.  That would be lunacy for an apartment-based home baker. Here you can see the start of something good.  However the number of laminations are incorrect. Starting to get the hang of shaping but still have some consistency issues. Much improvement on the layers of butter, now counting at 27. These are now full sized and looking pretty good.  Still more work to do! A  partial run of pain au chocolat.  Shy on the chocolate, I doubled up on the next run. I also decided to use the same dough the next time to make pain aux raisins for the first time.  Also a first time for making pastry cream.  Pleased at both for a virgin bake.
I am a novice bread baker. My only two efforts have met with disaster after placing the loaves in their pans for second rising. They don’t. I’m open to ideas to improve my success.
I haven't posted any breads on here for a long time because I haven't felt like I've baked anything different enough to be worth posting. Nonetheless, I still enjoy looking at the site every once in a while, and especially seeing people's blogs about their recent bakes.This boule is a mix of two doughs (that I also baked separately).The purple dough was made up of this (+salt @ around 2% of flour + potato): The other dough is also sourdough, with something like 300g high gluten flour and 200g corn meal, + 100g pumpkin seeds.I had tried making purple breads in the past using beets, but the color really faded during the baking process. I'm very happy with the color (and flavor) of the purple sweet potato bread. I roasted some extra purple SPs, and found them very dry to eat as a veggie. For me at least, they will stay as a bread ingredient, and not as a side dish.Overall, I was very happy with this bread: it tasted great, and the color contrast was quite nice.The whole boule:
Made these two to give away (one sent priority mail along with a spelt boule), so unfortunately I have no pictures of the crumb. They smelled delicious and I got great oven spring. They are both just under 25% whole wheat (a mix of mostly HRSW with some Kamut that I had on hand, all freshly ground), with the remainder being half AP and half bread flour. My starter is 100% hydration organic whole wheat. Formula makes two loaves, amounts are in grams. 6:00 pm: Mixed everything but the cranberries and pecans up together, let rest for an hour. 7:00 pm: Performed first stretch and fold. 7:30 pm: 2nd S&F 8:00 pm: Stretched dough out on counter to laminate. Added cranberries and pecans, folding them in during lamination. 8:30 pm: Third stretch and fold. Left to continue bulk until AM. 7:00 am: Dough was ready, so I divided it in two, pre-shaped, bench rested, then placed in two bannetons. 8:00 am: Preheated dutch oven and oblong clay baker at 475 F. 8:35 am: Loaves into oven. Baked at 475 for 15 minutes, then reduced oven temp to 450. Baked another 10 mins w/covers on, then 12 minutes with covers off. I put a cookie sheet under the baking vessels, as loaves in the dutch oven (cast iron) tend to get overly brown on the bottom. 9:12 am: Removed from oven, internal temp read 210 F. Let rest several hours. Took one to a friend, and later that same day mailed the other, along with a spelt boule, to another friend 3000 miles away. :)
Happy Holiday Wishes to All! It's been a long time since I've posted anything. I came back today searching for this yeasted bread to bake for a family Christmas breakfast bread. It's been so long!  I could not remember the name or where to find the recipe.  After searching I found it. 'Peter Reinhart's, The Bread Baker's Apprentice cinnamon raisin walnut bread'. My favorite is to use white raisins and pecans. This bread is loved and has been baked by so many of our long time Freshloafers! If you want a  commercial yeasted, fairly easy and super tasting bread to bake.  Try this one. Happy Holidays! Sylviah
Dec. 18, 2019. Goal:  25% KA AP loaf, 75% home-milled whole wheat.  Intending for largest loaf to fit in the deep part of the Lodge 3.2qt combo cooker.  Was off by 145 g, should have been 1200 g, instead of 1345 g.  88% hydration for the soaker with the home milled flour.  Approx 87% final hydration. 1.9% salt.  Using a new starter from CFH, SF  Sourdough, not the Carl's 1847, or the "Whole Wheat/desem" that I had used prior to that. 1:43 pm:  Mixed 100 g home-milled Kamut, 400 g home-milled Prairie Gold (hard white spring wheat), 440 g water. (37 min soaking time.) 2:20 pm: Folded/kneaded in 101 g starter (only 9 days since hydrating and growing some purchased culture, CFH Sourdough culture, so it's very young), at 125% hydration, which adds 45 g flour and 56 g water.  Starter is approximately 25% KA AP, 75% Prairie Gold. 2:24 pm: folded/kneaded in 166 g King Arthur all purpose flour, and 105 g water.  711 g flour in total. 601 g water so far.  84.5% hydration so far. 2:54 pm: stretch and fold. 3:36 pm:  Folded/kneaded in 13.5 g himalayan salt, and 20 gr water. 621 g total water. 87.3% final hydration. 4:09 pm: stretch and fold. (2.5 hours bulk ferment - 2:22 to 4:52. Ended up being too short.) 4:52 pm: folded, put in banneton. (1 hour, 43 minutes proof- 4:52 to 6:35. Also too short, but wanted to bake that night.) 6:35 pm: baked covered in Lodge 3.2 qt combo cooker, in the deep part, 495/475 F, 5 minutes.  Note:  1200 g whole of wheat is the limit for the deep part of combo. Should have baked this 1345 g boule in the wider lid/skillet, or limited to 1200 g for a better fit. 6:40 pm: baked covered, 475/455 F, 10 minutes. 6:50 pm: baked covered, 440/420 F, 15 minutes. 7:05 pm: baked uncovered, 400/380 F, 45 minutes.  Some oven spring. Acceptable (not "good")  opening of center X, barely opened on perimeter square score. 7:50 pm: Internal temp: 210.4 F. Done. Crumb was definitely underproofed.  I shouldn't have rushed things.  This was my first obvious under-proofing, so now at least I know what is  too low. The new starter was probably not mature and stable enough too.  Another few days will help. I want a more sour loaf than I have been getting, and have been over-proofing in the past. So I will continue to use a lower percent prefermented flour, and go with longer/overnight bulk ferment and proof. I know things change as a starter matures, but so far, I do like the taste of this bread better with the new CFH starter.
Given a busy holiday season and the very cold weather in my apartment, I wanted to try letting the bulk ferment go overnight. With the encouragement of the good TFL folks, I decided to try two loaves using 5% pre-fermented flour (50g starter/500g flour/375g water/10g salt) for an 11 hour room temp bulk (approximately 65 degrees) followed by 11 hours in the fridge. One loaf was 45% KABF, 5% rye, 50% organic T85, and pumpkin seeds. The other was 55% KABF, 5% rye, 20% freshly milled spelt, and 20% freshly milled hard red winter. I was surprised that the loaf using KABF and T85 seemed to absorb much more water than the freshly milled loaf. Perhaps it was because the spelt in the whole grain loaf didn't absorb much water? Predictably, the freshly milled loaf with more whole grains fermented faster and was perhaps slightly overprooved. Still, very happy with this experiment and will definitely try it again but maybe cut the levain percentage a tad on loaves with more whole grains. I'm giving the T85 loaf away so unfortunately I won't know what the crumb is like. The whole grain loaf tastes great. The crumb is a bit tighter than I'd like, but I still think it's pretty decent for 45% whole grain (I didn't sift at all). In case anyone is interested in trying this, I did a 1 hour autolyse, kneaded in the starter and let rest for 20 minutes, kneaded in the salt, rest, then three sets of coil folds.
Goals: 1200 g dough, 90% hydration, 1.9% salt.  Use last 266 g of home-milled Prairie Gold, and use equal amount, 266 g, of home-milled Kamut, and rest King Arthur All Purpose. Soak the 532 g (266+266) of home-milled flour for an hour with 88 % hydration, because it is coarse-milled. Use 100 g of starter, 125% hydration, with Cultures For Health San-Fran Sourdourgh culture (not the Whole Wheat/desem culture).  Fed it two days ago, hoping to bake then, but it sat in fridge.  Looks active, so I'll chance using it without feeding. Heck, mixing it in the dough is feeding the starter, so worst case, let it bulk ferment longer.  Use 1/8 to 1/10 th of a tablet of 500 mg vitamin C. 1200 g / 1.92 = 625 total flour.  625 flour - 45 flour in starter = 580 g.  580 -  532 in soaker = 48 g KA All Purpose. 45 g flour in starter / 625 total flour = 7.2% prefermented flour, PPF. 532 flour in soaker * .88 = 468 g water in soaker. 625 * .90 = 562 g total water.  562 water - 55 water in starter = 507 g.  507 - 468 in soaker = 39 g water to add in final mix. 12:15 pm: Mix 266 g home-milled coarse Prairie Gold HWSW, 266 g home-milled coarse Kamut, 11.8 g Himalayan salt, 468 g bottled spring water, 1/10 tablet (tried for 1/8, but it came out uneven) Vitamin C which was disolved in the water, 1 hour soak of home-milled coarse-milled grains. 1:15 pm: Mix in 101 g starter, 40 g water, 48 g King Arthur All Purpose flour, with the soaker. 1:48 pm: stretch and fold. 2:22 pm: stretch and fold. 2:53 pm: stretch and fold. 3:24 pm: stretch and fold. 4:45 pm: Total Bulk ferment: 3.5 hours. Shape and put in 8.5" outer diameter, 8" inner diameter, lined and dusted banneton.  Did not do a final fold.  Dusted with brown rice flour and KA AP. 5:40 pm: started oven pre-heat, 500 F. 6:30 pm: Total final proof: 1 hour, 45 minutes.  Used deep part of Lodge 3.2 qt combo cooker. Lightly oiled the bottom of pot, sprinkled corn meal in it.  Sprinkled corn meal on top (seam side)  of dough, and put a round parchment paper over it. Inverted pot over banneton, and flipped them over to load dough. Scored a square around perimeter, and an X on top. 6:30 pm: Bake covered, at 495/475* F, 5 min. 6:35 pm: Bake covered, at 475/455 F, 10 min. 6:45 pm: Bake covered, at 430/410 F, 15 min. 7:00 pm: Uncover, bake at 400/380 F, 41 min. 7:41 pm: Internal temp:  210.2 F. done. Looks good! Nice oven spring along all score lines, both around perimeter, and the X on top. Let cool 2 hours, then put in zipper seal bag. -- *First number is oven setting, second is actual, according to a cheapy oven thermometer.
4 types of bread baked for christmas lunch bottom left is a Potato and Rosemarie s/d with white flour bottom centre is a 1kg  brioche plait white flour bottom right is a multigrain using London Porter as the  liquid content top is two curved epis  with black spanish olives and fennell seeds flours used were an imported italian Granoro il Primo tipo "00" and a multigrain from a local providora in Fremantle. All were very much enjoyed  by family and friends along with other fine christmas fare on a 36 degree C day.
Well after thinking about this for a while, and finally getting a grain mill for Christmas, I am going to jump into a new adventure in bread.  I am going to start playing around with some ancient grains.  I am going to start with a whole wheat and Spelt Pan Levain formula I found on Perfect Loaf, then an Einkorn Miche on the same site.  Then we go full into the darkside with Amaranth, sprouted grains and Freekah.  Will do my best to write about the trials and tribulations as I encounter them. This should be fun and frustrating all at the same time. Here are the links for the first 2. https://www.theperfectloaf.com/whole-grain-wheat-and-spelt-pan-bread/ https://www.theperfectloaf.com/einkorn-miche/
Well, it sure has.  Thanksgiving has come and gone and so has Christmas.  The photo above is a very white SD Chacon of 7% rye and the rest KA bread flour at 78% hydration using 15 g of long stored Rye NMNF starter  -that was lurking at least 4 months in the bottom of the fridge. Chacon crumb The great and wonderful Son in Law was her e so I finally got to showing him how to make a SD bread using very wet dough to boost his knowledge and experience,  The Chacon shaping was new for him but we covered slap and folds stretch and folds and shaping the non Chacon part if the dough.  This one was proofed on the counter after a 4 hour retard.    The 2nd loaf was a gift that my daughter was giving to a friend in Seattle with 120 g of newly refreshed 66% hydration NMNF rye starter. This friend wanted a loaf and astarter to get her on her way to making great SD bread too!  Hers was a mix of red and white wheat with some rye at 10% whole grains.  We let this one proof in the fridge for 14 hours and we took it out as we fired up the oven to bake it.  This one was scored. The brisket flat sliced perfectly.  The decadent point disappeared so fast I couldn't get a shot. Both were baked in a Combo Cooker since I got one for my SIL last Christmas.  20 min at 465 F lid on and 15 min at 425 F convection.  Forgot to spritz them so at least that didn't change.  They both came off the bottom of the cooker 5 min after the lid came off and finished right on the oven racks and baked to 208 F Mabel the Magnificent. She's and 11 month old AussieDoodle.  The sweetest Baby ever! And the nearly 16 year old Lucy sound asleep. 78% hydration is too much for a Chacon with 72-763% about right so it didn't really pop like it normally would to reveal the design.  The score also sort of sealed itself up because it was so wet -  so no gringe on the other one either.  The crumb was just the way we like it.  Soft, moist and glossy with various hole sizes.  Both of these would be called classic SFSD 's,  The Chacon tasted terrific. Puff Paste for Chocolate Cinnamon Rugelach! We used the Chacon for Christmas Eve Prime. Smoked Beef Brisket made just the way Aaron Franklin describes in his book with the following exceptions.  We used my new vertical pellet smoker using a competition blend if cherry, apple and hickory instead of post oak,  We all agreed that it was the best brisket we have ever had so hats off to Aarron Franklin of Austin Texas! Extra thin tortilla pizza with a nice Chianti and my daughter's Christmas Eve salad that made Lucy proud. The SD bread was the perfect white bread for such grand smoked meat.  I love that new smoker it has made everything; ribs, turkey breast, chicken thighs, sausage and pork butt perfectly every time.  Only available exclusively at Lowe's - Pit Boss Pro Series 4, vertical pellet smoker - highly recommended and only $379 - half the price of a Traeger, horizontal barrel . Son In Law's Christmas Breakfast SD Cheese and Scallion Popovers - Yummy with home made Lox and Nova Lox ! The Arizona Sunsets are still the same but this was a Christmas Eve Sunrise. Happy New Year to the all the Fresh Lofians from Lucy and I
I just wanted a convenient searchable reference for this figure.  How much sodium per gram of salt? 393.4 mg of sodium in 1 g (gram) salt. according to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sodium_chloride That figure is for _pure_ sodium chloride.  Additives, such as anti-caking ingredients, will alter it slightly.  "Sea salt" and various "gourmet" salts may also include minerals, and may have included moisture, both of which would render a lower portion of sodium (and chloride).  393.4 would then be a maximum figure.
Gobi (cauliflower) chicken Makhani with SD naan XO sauce fried cheung fun (Chinese rice noodle rolls) with Chinese sausage Homemade noodles with mushrooms & sugar snap peas in a coconut cream sauce Pressure cooked lamb shank with mushrooms, bean curd sticks & carrots (Chinese fermented red bean curd seasoned). So good... Top blade steak chili, oven fried BBQ drumettes, seared scallops with sweet potato fries, Yorkshire pudding, Sautéed brussel sprouts & radishes with toasted walnuts, and pepper rice pilaf See? The chili wasn't burnt! And lastly, two green bread for Christmas: Matcha bagels (30% rye & Red Fife) Basil pesto SD (40% atta) Happy New Year to all!
It’s been so long since I made this bread that I forgot how delightful it is.  My initial go-to instinct was to build a 125% AP levain and then run a most reliable Hamelman Vermont SD.  This, after waltzing with Maurizio’s Cinnamon Raisin SD baguettes and my Sesame Semolina baguettes.  Intermixed with learning the tricks of the trade re: croissants, pain au chocolate, pain aux raisins and some cinnamon buns with raisins and walnuts.  Still work to be done on all fronts there. However, time to return to something more simple.  Until, with visions of golden raisins dancing in my head, I decided to return to the pain au levain with WW and then add raisins to it.   I had already built my 125% levain and was ready to go when I had this revelation.  And then noticed that the Hamelman formula calls for a 60% hydration levain.  I altered the hydration of the levain in the formula sheet to match my now bubbly 125% concoction, printed off the formula and was on my way.  Along with the addition of 20% golden raisins. The raisins make this somewhat dessert-like, and the crust has a good snap to it.  It will make superb fresh bread as well as superior toast - either with a soft cheese like Brie or with the morning butter. Although I’ve published this twice before here and here, as there were two mods to the formula I decided to put three on a match. Hamelman Pain au Levain with Whole Wheat, 125% AP Levain and 20% Golden Raisin. 350g x 4 baguettes/long batards
When I was a little kid, when parents want to show off how good their kids were in spelling (it's a double-edged sword actually for it is also often used when you want to give someone a hard time :D), they will make them spell "Czechoslovakia." Being so foreign sounding and with a peculiar arrangement of consonants for our eyes and ears, it was really difficult for kids in this side of the world to spell and really shows how good they were in actually "memorizing" letters for the correct spelling.We only know the word but we really don't know what Czechoslovakia actually was. It was only in high school during geography class I finally knew that it was a country that has peacefully became two independent countries. While browsing bread videos, I randomly saw this cute little buns called buchty and was surprised that it came from those countries The memories just came rushing back. If you want to know more about it, here is an excellent information and recipe. It is also popular in neighboring countries and goes by many other names.Here is my sourdough version. (Pardon for the rushed photos and lumpy icing sugar, I did not have my little sifter with me...) I did not have plum butter so I filled them with a dark raisin jam. I did not have the chance to cut one bun in half (because they were demolished so quickly) but you can see the filling peeking in the lower right corner of the next photo.I served the way it is served in Austria, with vanilla sauce. So delicious!
12/29/2019.  Goal:  1200 g boule, all WW except for what's in starter.  Overnight bulk ferment in cold (71 F falling to 67 F) kitchen. 9:00 pm. Mix: 500 g home-milled Prairie Gold hard white spring wheat, 100 g home-milled Kamut, 11.7 g salt, 56 g levain of 125% hydration ( 25 g flour, 31 g water), 472 g bottled spring water. 11.7 / 625 = 1.87% salt. 25 / 625 = 4.0% prefermented flour. 9:19 pm. Mix in 26 g additional water, 2 heaping tsp of ground  chia seed, 1 tsp caraway seed. (I'm guessing  add-ins are 3 gr.) 529 / 625 = 84.6% hydration.  Total weight:  1168.7 g. Leave in bowl. cover with plastic wrap.  Two series of stretch and folds. 12/30/2019. 6:30 am. Fold/shape put in floured lined banneton.  Slowly pre-heat oven. Put in deep part of 3.2 qt Lodge cast iron combo cooker.  Bottom of pot lightly oiled with refined coconut oil, sprinkled with corn meal.  Dust top (seam side) of boule with corn meal and cover with round piece of parchment paper.  Invert pot over banneton, flip both over.  Removed banneton and scored with a circular cut all around the edge, plus X on top. 7:56 am.  Bake covered, 495/475 F, 5 min. 8:01 am. Covered, 475/455  F, 10 min. 8:11 am. Covered, 430/410 F, 20 min. 8:31 am. Uncover,  bake at 400/380, 35 min. 9:06 am. Internal temp: 209.1 F. Turned off oven, place pot and loaf back in for 5 minutes. 9:12 am. Internal temp 208.8.  Remove, start cool. Some oven spring, acceptable.  Probably over fermented a bit.  4% was too much innoculation for an overnight bulk ferment outside the fridge. Good crumb.  Chia darkened the color.  Caraway taste goes well with whole wheat.
Same as last year's, the only differences are I used the best butter I found and I already got hold of the traditional Edam Cheese (Queso de Bola) used for a Filipino Ensaymada. Of course, I served it with traditional Filipino hot chocolate. My colleague makes the best cooked ham so I made a version with ham, similar to our province's style of making ensaymada—the only thing missing is salted egg. Queso de bola is also saltier and more pungent/flavorful than most cheeses so a sprinkling is all that is needed for both versions. It is already just a few more minutes before 2020 here! I wish all of us a happier, healthier, and more blessed 2020!Happy New Year!
This is my first time attempting the couronne Bordelaise. I followed the instructions given by Susan at Wild Yeast Blog, using her Norwich Sourdough recipe as well, though I scaled the recipe down by 25% to produce two (roughly) 750 gram loaves. I did a test run two days ago, which turned out pretty well, though I had some problems with execution. I rolled the center disk out too much, and that piece didn't separate to produce the "crown" effect. The first of the two I baked this morning similarly failed to crown thoroughly. Third time is the charm. These are going with me to a New Year's Day party this afternoon. I don't have a couronne proofing basket, so I rigged two up using cake pans and small ramekins covered by cloth napkins. Proofing in the proofing "basket" Couronne #1, ready to go into the oven. Couronne #1 baking. Couronne #1 - this one didn't "crown" much. Couronne #2 - success!
I've really been enjoying reducing my levain to 10% and doing a longer bulk ferment this winter. I wanted to make some loaves to give away and to serve at a party, so I tried mixing dough for 6 loaves at once. Boy, that was a mistake! My scale couldn't handle the weight so all of my measurement were thrown off, but somehow the breads may be my best ever (at least visually). The dough was 10% levain, 2% salt, 45% KABF, 50% T85, and 5% rye. I would guess the hydration ended up being around 80% but my calculations were thrown off. I find my Farmer Ground Flour T85 to be very thirsty. At the lamination stage I divided the dough into two cheddar/jalapeno, two leek/mustard seed/shallot, one rosemary olive, and one raisin/walnut. The autolyse was about 2.5 hours. I kneaded the dough on the counter to add the levain and then kneaded salt and extra water (about equal amounts salt and water) 15 minutes later. I did one set of S&F before the lamination. I think I did 2 sets of coil folds, but it is possible that I did 3. The bulk ferment at 69 degrees went for about 8.5 hours, shaped, on the counter for 30 minutes, and then 13 hours in the fridge. I can't figure out why these loaves came out so well! I just hope I can repeat it. I think having a slightly higher hydration versus my last bake with the same flours helped. I also think I got the length of the bulk ferment about right.
For handy reference. Courtesy of Duckduckgo. Celsius Fahrenheit C x 1.8 + 32 = F
Or something like that... To be honest, I'm just starting out as a baker. I've made a few loaves of bread, some cookies, and some dinner rolls. I originally tried out baking as a way to relax on my days off. Something about the mindfulness associated with the whole process - mixing, kneading, waiting, working, baking, enjoying - really appeals to me. I don't have a lot of time or money, and so my baking is done "by appointment". I block out time, find some recipes or plan my day in advance, and do most everything by hand. No mixers, no scales. Recently, though, I've started paying more attention to baking. My wife, the ever-supportive taster, has encouraged me to make baking a more regular thing, and even found some books to inspire me. At this point, once a week is about all I can manage, but I try to squeeze several recipes in at a time to get the most out of my day. I'm most interested in mastering a unique, natural breads. I also really want to try my hand at pastry, though I'm not sure I have the temperament for it. Being from Vermont, I have ample access to the great King Arthur Flour and their many great products. There is also a thriving Locavore movement here, and a huge emphasis on natural and organic alternatives. These are all things I'm interested in! Lastly, I want to be healthy. I've always been overweight, and have had trouble with highly processed foods and sugars. I feel that baking may be the key to a healthier lifestyle, one where I can appreciate and enjoy smaller portions of rich food. So, healthier lifestyle, lower stress, and a deeper understanding and appreciation for baking. These are what I'm going for!
This was last night’s dinner.  I made my usual sourdough pizza dough following the recipe that the PieKing shared with us for the pizza CB. This pizza had homemade fresh pizza sauce for which I used Peter Reinhart’s recipe from his book Artisan Breads Everyday.  In order to keep the crust crispy and avoid sogginess from the sauce, I first put a layer of prosciutto then the sauce.  This was followed by mozzarella cheese, onions, pineapple, roasted red peppers and once out of the oven a bit more prosciutto. This definitely made a tasty pizza so long as you like pineapple which we do.
Jan 2, 2020. Close to #14.  625 g total flour,  87.8 % total hydration.  Mostly HWSW, a little Kamut, a little quinoa flour, a tablespoon of BRM GF flour. A little molasses in the soaker.  Used 1/4 vit C tablet, 125 mg ,  and 2 tsp vital wheat gluten in soaker too.  Added 2 tsp dried malt extract when added levain.   Got good oven spring.  Nice light springy crumb, but not too open.
getting home to Seattle from his one on one, exclusive, Holiday SD Bread Making Lesson in Arizona with Lucy!  He gets it now! A Thing of Beauty it is! Used 24 week retarded NMNF rye starter 10 g to make a 50 g WW, 100% hydration starter.  79% hydration overall with 26% whole wheat, the rest half bread flour and the other half AP.  I set of slap and folds to mix followed by 4 sets of stretch and and folds from the compass points on 30 minute interval.  3 hours final proof in a basket.   Baked at 475 F in a combo cooker preheated to 525 F with lid on and 10 min at 450 F lid off removed from bottom of combo cooker to oven rack 5 min after lid came off.  This sounds very familiar:-)  He has a proofer on his oven to keep everything at 80 F though!  He said it isn't as tasty as mine though but he knows why - no 1-2 day retard ff the levain and no overnight retard for the final proof but he didn't have the time since they were going skiing at Whistler's.  Still very nice! Here is his apprentice. The Mabes,  not wanting to get out of bed.
In trying to understand the mechanics of how to achieve certain types of crumbs, I pushed my bulk rise a bit in hopes of achieving the characteristic lacy crumb. I think I got it!
It was a cold blustery day, and I felt like some comfort food. Daniel Leader's book "Simply Great Breads" has a formula for yeast-raised fry bread. Years ago, I learned a simple way to make fry bread, without any leavening agent, just plain AP flour, salt, water, and powdered milk.  As the moisture steams/boils off, it sufficiently aerates the dough.  But I had forgotten the exact recipe.  Lightly dust with sugar while the oil is still wet on the fried bun. "Fry bread" is not taking a piece of bread and frying it.  That would be toast. "Fry bread" is taking a piece of dough, usually in the form of a disc, and deep frying it, or pan-frying in a sufficient layer of oil/fat to approximate deep frying. Using baking powder, yeast, or sourdough starter, makes an even fluffier piece of fry bread. The trick is to not use too much leavening agent, and don't let it rise too long if using yeast/sourdough.  Too much will create a too big pocket of air. I used mostly home-milled whole-grain flour.  It still worked well, as I let the dough sit a while to fully hydrate. 375 F seems to be a good temp.  I don't have a controlled temperature fryer.  I just used a wok and a thermometer. Setting 4 on the electric burner's control dial seems to maintain 375 F. But adding the room temp dough drops the oil's temp quickly, so I was almost constantly fiddling with the dial, usually starting by getting the oil up to 400/425 F right before putting the dough in the oil. I made enough dough for four pieces, intending to eat two and save two for later.  I ended up eating all four.  Such is the danger of comfort food. My hood fan over the stove merely filters the air, it does not vent to the outside.  So the oil frying smell lingered for a day or so. -- I have one of those circular  "turbo convection ovens", which is the predecessor of the "air fryer."  It's a big glass bowl with the fan and heating element built into the lid.  I might try that to make fry bread.
On the levain feeding side of life: My 100% hydration AP levain was last fed on 08 Dec.  After two feedings yesterday, 07 Jan, it was quite happy again.  Posting these last two sentences to disseminate the knowledge that a well developed 100% AP levain in the back of the refrigerator can sustain a full month, at the least, without being fed, and spring back to life in a pair of feedings. Our friend, who'd sampled a fair amount of my breads before, was joining us for lunch yesterday.  But she'd never had my ciabatta. Yes, I've posted this before, as both an AP Biga and AP levain, as well as a levain tritordeum version.  This mod is minor, but brings me back to the more basic FWS combo.  A place where I most prefer to reside.  Mr. MeGee’s version uses olive oil, and in that regard I’d been true - until now. Here it is simply a levain FWS bread with a very minor boost of IDY, y nada más. My feeling was that the olive oil was coating the gluten strands making then slick and therefore might be inhibiting their structural growth, and also causing a minor increase in mixing time which, with an old KA dough hook mixer, is too long to begin with. Once more, here is the formula at 1500g.  I removed the olive oil and added that amount to the bassinge and the hydration is now 79%. ~500g x 3 ciabatta loaves
Started making sourdough after reviving some starter a friend gave me. First attempt, didn't really follow a recipe so who knows what happened. Was still really happy with it. Wasn't used to the fact that sourdough dough would be so slack and only become more slack over time as the proteolytic enzymes did their thing. Supplemented the dough with 1/4 tsp instant yeast and made the dough really high hydration, which definitely didn't help. Still came out well, best tasting bread I've ever made at that point. A little more sour than I would've liked because I was being cheap and didn't want to feed the starter too much. Second round. Loosely followed some recipes I read, including the San Joaquin Sourdough. Turned out delicious! Best bread I've made yet. Starter 120 gAP Flour 410 gRye 30 g (5.5 %)Yeast 1/8 tspSalt 10 gWater 300 g (72% hydration) 1. Roughly 30 min autolyse2. 100 french folds3. 2 rounds of S&F with 30 folds per round, spaced at 30 minute interval4. Total of 90 minute bulk ferment, dough didn't double much or grow (not sure if was is an issue)5. 20 hour cold ferment6. Let come to room temp for 2 hours (since it didn't grow much or develop many air pockets in the fridge)7. Preheat oven to 500 ˚F, prepare two pans for steam8. Shape then final proof for an hour. I didn't think the loaf would have much spring because it was so slack with few air bubbles. Dough would spring back really quickly during the poke test but stop springing back just before the hole was completely filled, decided to go ahead and bake.9. Add 1 cup boiling water to one pan and close the oven door. Score bread and load into baking stone using parchment paper. Add second cup boiling water to the second pan. Bake at 500 ˚F for 23 minutes. Cool in oven with door cracked for 10 minutes.
This is the results of Forkish's Overnight white bread The directions state dough requires 12-14 hours bulk fermentation with a temp between 76ºF and 78ºF. DOUGH STATISTICS \ DOUGH FORMULA PRE MIX MIX COMPLETED AUTOLYSE COMPLETED BEFORE KNEADING (ADD SALT) KNEADING COMPLETED COMPLETED BAKE SOUNDS OF BREAD sounds of bread from on Vimeo. CRUMB DELAYED GRATIFICATION COMMENTS
Mixers returned to us, inspected, brand new and unused. Just the box has been opened. Limited quantities and colors. $550 PLUS shipping (no shipping if you come to our retail store). Price good while supplies last!
I’ve been wanting to do a fruit and nut sourdough for sometime and decided my first bake of the year would be that time.  I’ve made raisin walnut commercially yeasted bread in the past so wanted to do something different, so chose cranberry walnut.  I started out thinking that would be follow Maurizio’s cranberry walnut sourdough recipe, but then got intimadated by his 88% hydration and also wanted to try lamination again.  So I sort os used his beginner sourdough recipe 78% hydration and added 10% dried cranberries and 10% lightly toasted walnuts.  Then I essentially followed Full Proof Baking Kristen’s methods that we used for the open crumb CB.  I thought that this would be a perfect way of introducing the nuts and fruit during lamination and I think it worked out alright. This was also the first time I used my Proofing Box and I’m glad that I now have one given the cold temperatures of winter in Toronto.  I’m not sure I should be surprised but bulk fermentation went a bit more slowly than I expected.  I hope I judged fermentation well and didn’t greatly underproof the dough.  I guess I will know tomorrow when I cut into the loaf.  One other thing, in my haste to score the dough, I made the incision in too vertical a plane instead of a good angle so the ear isn’t as good as I would have liked.
Oval banneton, 10x6x4, with liner: https://amazon.com/inch-Premium-Banneton-Basket-Liner/dp/B06XJ698WV?tag=froglallabout-20 Oval banneton, 11", with liner: https://amazon.com/Agile-shop-Banneton-Brotform-Proofing-Handmade/dp/B01HXTLDH4?tag=froglallabout-20 Round banneton, 11.8", with liner: https://amazon.com/Agile-Shop-Banneton-Brotform-Proofing-Handmade/dp/B01FXA5K3S?tag=froglallabout-20 --- Round banneton, 12", Brick Oven Baker: https://amazon.com/BrickOvenBaker-12-inch-Banneton-Proofing-Basket/dp/B01B9UEP3W?tag=froglallabout-20 Oval, high, 10", Brick Oven Baker: https://amazon.com/BrickOvenBaker-10-inch-Banneton-Proofing-Basket/dp/B01B9UELCM?tag=froglallabout-20 --- 80+ types of flour at General Mills:  https://www.generalmillscf.com/products/category/flour Of note to bread and pizza bakers: See right s,ide for form to locate a distributor based on zip code. --- To get more tang, and lactic vs acetic: https://www.thefreshloaf.com/node/62064/want-more-sour https://truesourdough.com/best-temperature-for-proofing-sourdough-full-guide-how-to/ https://truesourdough.com/18-ways-to-make-sourdough-bread-more-or-less-sour/
I had the day off yesterday, and decided it would be a good day for baking! I even got a new scale, and was very excited to try it out! I decided to try out the basic recipe listed on the site here. I was hoping it would yield a decent loaf that I could then add to in the future for more variety. Ingredients: 3 cups flour2 teaspoons salt2 teaspoons yeast1 1/8 cup water Mixed the flour and water first, and let it sit for about 10 minutes. Added the other ingredients, and kneaded for about 10 minutes, then set it to rise for about 90 minutes. Got pretty good rise out of this, and didn't have to do much shaping, but I think I may have punched down a bit too much (check later photos). The second rise went well, but the dough lost a lot of volume when I scored it. It puffed up well in the oven, though. I preheated to 450, and had a small pan for water heating with it. When I put the dough in, I added about 2 cups of water to the pan to steam it, then dropped the temperature to 375. The end result: Overall, this was a fairly easy process. However, there were some issues with the final loaf, and I'm not sure how to correct them for the future. 1. While the crust was good and the crumb seemed alright at first cut (see above). The flavor, however, was quite salty. Not sure if this was due to the salt content at the start, or some problem with the yeast. 2. I noticed that there was a lot of inconsistency in the crumb after making a few more cuts. Most of the loaf appears to have baked normally, but there are sections like this that appear underbaked. I'm thinking about baking at a higher temperature next time to see if that fixes the issue. It may be that the boule shape made it so that the temperature wasn't high enough to properly bake the inside. So, overall, not the outcome I was hoping for, but not terrible either. I'm going to try a bit less salt next time, more careful handling/scoring at the end of the process before baking, and baking at a higher temperature to see how that impacts the results. If anyone has any insights or recommendations, I would be grateful for some guidance. Until next time, Bake On!
Hi, One of my favourite recipes is the Vermont Sourdough from Jeffrey  Hamelmans bread book.  I am finding many people are requesting me bake these for them.  I only have a KA mixer for the kneading and find it very difficult to kneed a large amount of dough by hand.  Is there any way I can use the no knead method for this recipe?
Pa de Vidre / Glass Bread I’d made this once before a few months ago after warehousing Abel’s posting for over a year.  Time to try again and figure out the mysteries & miseries of how to make this bread “properly".  And it took about 4-5 iterations over the course of a week, each time trying a new thing or two.  Until I had a breakthrough two nights ago in the mixing phase on my final failed attempt.  But with some additional tweaking, last night’s product came out of the oven looking pretty darned close to what I was after. There were two key elements to the success.  The first was to the initial mix being performed by hand rather than relying solely on my mechanical mixer.  This step now develops a smooth fully incorporated dough ready for the mixer.  The second was the careful handling of the dough during the transfer from bench to oven peel.  the “wettest” and lightest handling of the divided dough as possible. Pan de Cristal is a fairly amorphous animal that dares the baker to move it from bench top to oven peel without partially or totally destroying the anticipated shaping or the structure of the dough.  At a total of 95% hydration (90% water, 5% oil) with 90% white flour, it is not one to accommodate any type of man-handling.  So I knew and so I’ve learned. My first attempts last week varied the hydration from 95% - 85% in failed effort to get the dough to behave.  But the hydration isn’t really the issue.  It’s like having musical notes on a page - which account for only 10% of what the final sound is - the other 90% is the skill and soul of the musician. When I decided to forego the dividing and shaping altogether by placing the entire BF'ed mass into a baking dish, the notes didn’t play so well.  But at the point I had already unlocked the “secret” to getting a well mixed and well developed dough. This dough rises very fast due to the IDY, Levain and sugar. In my kitchen, 90 minutes was about all it took to triple in size.  The addition of Letter Folds at 0, 30 and 60 minutes provides the strength this dough needs to be workable at all - at least to me. An earlier failed attempt at 85% hydration.  The crumb was okay, actually fairly good. This was the 95% hydr. failed baking pan attempt.  At this point two nights ago I'd figured out how to get a quality mix and Bulk Ferment. And the resultant batons.  Just did not work - at all!  Dense and overly chewy.  At least the crust was in the vicinity of where i wanted to be. The lead photo and these next few were last night's success story.  I don't think the look of the bread is all that off from what I imagine it should be. The bread is incredibly light and airy and when freshly baked or reheated/toasted the crust takes on that snap which likely gives the bread its name, while the crumb remains moist and tender.  I am not often a fan of the "rustic" look of bread that has more than a minimum of raw flour on the crust.  And so I appreciate that these do not.
My first bread made with poolish.  It was excellent!! the crust was crackly and not hard the crumb was creamy and flavorful. One thing interesting is that bulk fermentation took 3 hours longer than what was recommended in FWSY
I took a break from weekly baking over the Xmas holidays. I did bake a batch for my brother during that time but that was it. Amazing how easy one batch seems when you don’t have to repeat everything 4 times.
I had some bananas sitting around and was inspired by a banana sourdough post from Trailrunner. I'd also been itching to make another chocolate sourdough, so I decided to make the two doughs and laminate the two together. I found it pretty hard to develop the gluten in the banana dough (which uses almost no water and just bananas for hydration), so I won't be surprised if this is a dense loaf. One loaf looks quite pretty from the outside, the other is a lovable mutant with bumps and lumps.
Hi, I'm not sure why my loaf turned out so flat and dense. I have a few suspicions but I was wondering if anyone could give me suggestions on how to improve. Starter 150 gAP flour 300 g 150 g bread flourWhole wheat 55 gWater 364 g (76%)Salt 12 gIDY (1/8 tsp to supplement starter)2 tbs oatmeal (soaked then pressed dry)120 g toasted chopped walnuts100 g dried dates 1. Feed starter2. At the same time, mix flour, salt and water for a 1.5 hr autolyse (I know I didn't do this for long enough)3. Dimple starter into dough and gently fold to incorporate.4. 3 rounds S&F between 30 min intervals (add soaked oats, walnuts and dates after first round), a total of 2.5 hour bulk ferment5. 20-hour cold ferment6. 1 last S&F to help release dough from the bowl, pre-round then bench rest for 1-2 hrs (dough very wet although gluten development looked good, walnut pieces might've been too large)7. Shape8. 40-minute hour proof in towel-lined bowl (cut short because the poke test indicated the dough was ready)9. bake at 500 F on baking stone with steam for 15 mins10. bake with convection at 470 F for 2511. returned to oven, covered in foil, for 30 mins at 350, loaf had already cooled for 25 mins Edit: added extra images
I made Maurizio's waffles with some discard this morning.  You'll find his recipe here. The modification was to use a blend of 50% whole buckwheat flour and 50% unbleached bread flour in place of the 250g of all-purpose. Otherwise it was pretty much the same.  I had been accumulating starter from feedings this past week in a glass jar in the fridge. I didn't weigh or measure it so I assume I probably added a full cup rather than half - but it was more spent than not (ie: not active, but not totally depleted either. Using a Belgian waffle maker the recipe yielded five full rounds.
I came across this recipe a few weeks back. It talks about making a 40% hydrated starter to be left neglected for a few weeks while acid builds up and yeast permeates the starter. Later that "seed sourdough" is used as part of the bread recipe. I decided to give it a try.  I made the "seed starter" three weeks ago and left it in a cool room @ at about 55F degrees. I then followed the recipe as outlined. The crust is delicate, not too crisp but almost shatters as you cut into it; it also has a bit of a chew to it. The aroma is subtle but fragrant. The crumb is very soft and almost lacey in texture and has a "milky" quality in it's taste as well.  It's a very nice bread and I'll play with this some more. I also thought this could be good way to use left over starter - to feed it to a 40% hydration and leave it for a few weeks to be added to future bakes. The one thing that was VERY strange was that the dough skin during bulk tore with light coil folds. It was as if the structure was too weak to handle it's own weight. I'd fold it and then come back in 30 minutes to fold again but find a tear on the skin. And as bulk went on the skin would tear while doing subsequent folding. It wasn't completely falling apart, but definitely struggled. I thought perhaps to add a few percent of gluten flour to help next time I try this. It didn't proof and expand very much - maybe by 25% - I think because the structure wasn't fully there.  I think "why?" has to do with the acid overload that the seed starter is providing. I know I've read the link between gluten development, starch, the development of enzyme alpha amylase and acid but don't remember how the connection all works. If someone comes across this post and knows what's going on in this bread please share - thank you! I'd encourage you to try this. There's something special going on with this bread.  The French salted butter helped! :)
I bought some Glenn wheat berries from Kenter Canyon farm at the Atwater Village farmers market ( in Los Angeles). It was $2 per pound, not cheap but not too outrageous. The Glenn wheat is grown in Santa Rosa, California. I’m currently buying hard red spring wheat from Montana Flour and Grains by mail, and I would like to transition to a more local supplier. I milled it and baked my typical loaf- sourdough, 100% whole grain, no additives besides salt. The starter is rye and comprised 10% of the grain. The other 90% was the Glenn wheat ( replacing the montana hard red spring wheat). The hydration of the loaf was 80%. 2% salt. Impressions- the flour held up well to fermentation with sourdough. The final crumb was softer than the Montana loaf is typically. Probably lower gluten, but strong enough to get a nice enough profile with the usual treatment. Excellent aroma including malty notes. I have been adding spelt to my wheat loaves to reduce the chewiness of the hard red spring loaves, and I’d say the Glenn loaf is an excellent texture alone. Here is a crumb picture
My husband requested a recipe I'd made a few years back (before I got into sourdough) of kubaneh from the cookbook Golden. Since I now know a bit more about bread, I decided to make some slight changes. I didn't have time to convert to sourdough, but I did add 10% sourdough starter and added some whole wheat. It was even better than I remembered! Next time I'll convert the recipe to sourdough. This bread is baked in an 8-inch deep cake tin covered in tinfoil and the outside gets beautifully dark and caramelized. The burnt bits are the best part. Yum! I mixed the dough for a good long while and then allowed it to roughly double (2 hours). You then divide the dough into 7-8 pieces and place on a tray covered in olive oil. Take each piece of dough, place about 10g of butter in the center, form into a ball, and place into buttered tin. Drizzle the top with honey I then let the dough sit at room temperature for 30 minutes before placing in the fridge overnight. I baked in the morning - 30m at 425, 30m at 400, 30m at 350 and then leave the dough in the turned-off oven for 1 hour before eating.
Another day off, another baking adventure! I don't have my notes with me as I write this, so I'll just give an overview. After last weeks attempt at a basic french loaf, I went back to re-read a few things, including my copy of The Baker's Apprentice. This book has been a big part of my push to get into baking, and it includes a lot of great tips and ideas that are easy for me to get my head around. I decided to try the French Bread recipe from the book, using a pate fermentee that I chilled overnight. Below is an approximate measurement of the ingredients. Again, no notes today! 284 g Flour 5.5 g salt 1.9 g yeast 182 g water The following morning, I cut the dough and let it warm on the counter for about an hour. After mixing in the new flour, salt, yeast, and water, I had a good amount to work with. While the recipe claimed that the dough would become tacky in 3 - 4 minutes, I found it far more sticky that expected, and so kept adding flour while I worked it. This ended up being fine, though it threw me at first. Instead of simply letting it rise, I used the pull-and-fold technique 3 times at 30-minute intervals, before letting the dough rest of an hour. I definitely noticed a lot of gas buildup by doing this, and was very careful to not degas any more than necessary to perform the folds. The biggest change I made was to work the dough into a boule shape instead of the baguettes called for in the book. I decided to extend the baking time but keep the rest of the instructions (heat/steam). I initially started at 450, but ended up dropping it to 425 just before putting the dough in. I also didn't spritz the dough itself; instead, I used a pan of water to steam it in the beginning. The result was a well-shaped, crispy-crusted wonder! Soft and chewy inside, tight uneven crumb, and delicious. The outside definitely crisped more than my last loaf, with a nice dark brown crackle when I cut into it. So, overall, I'm extremely happy with the results. This one is definitely worth making again! UPDATE: Here's photos of the loaf, a day out of the oven. The top is flaking a bit, so perhaps the crumb was a bit uneven, with too much air at the top. Thoughts?
Jan 21, 2020.  17th TFL bake.  Best so far. Goal:  1200 g boule (fits in 1 gallon storage zipper bag), 90% home-milled flour, 10% AP flour, try more autolyse, reduce amount of Kamut, increase autolyse/soak, short ferment (not overnight). 9:15 am: Mix 354 g Prairie Gold HWSW, 91 g Kamut, 91 g HRWW, all home-milled, 429 g bottled spring water, 1/8 tablet of a 500 mg vitamin C tablet (approx 62.5 mg). 429 / ( 354 + 91 + 91 ) =  429 / 536 = 80% hydration. ~~ [1 hour, 55 minute autolyse/soak.] 11:10 am: Mix in: 40 g water, 50 gr King Arthur AP flour, 97 g of 125% hydration cold starter (last fed yesterday). 97 g of 125% starter = 44 g flour + 53 g water.   Assume 13 g of flour in starter is AP flour. PPF:  44 / (536 + 50 + 44) = 44 / 630 = 7.0 %.  High enough for a same day bulk ferment and proof.  7% is high for a mostly whole-grain dough that has been autolysed for a while. Percent white flour ( 50 + 13 in starter ) / 630 = 10% white flour.  ~~ 90% home-milled whole grain. PPM Vitamin C: 62.5 mg / 630 g = 99.2 parts per million. 11:45 am: Slowly mix in 20 g water, and 12.0 g Himalayan salt, via stretch and folds.  Dough becomes very stiff due to salt, but it will slacken. Total hydration so far:  ( 429 + 40 + 53 in starter + 20 with the salt) / ( 536 + 50 + 44 ) = 542 / 630 = 86%. 11:50 am: finish adding salt and water. 12:19 pm: Stretch and fold. 12:54 pm: Stretch and fold. 1:54 pm: Stretch and fold. 2:55 pm: Stretch and fold. ~~[5 hrs, 7 min bulk ferment.] 4:17 pm: Letter fold and shape on an AP flour-dusted surface.  Did a better job of stretching skin of boule than before, dragging boule across the surface to develop tension. Dusted 8.7" O.D. linen-lined banneton with tapioca flour and brown rice flour. Slightly wetted top of boule with water and spread soaked chunks of bran that had been sifted (#20 mesh) from milling process. Shouldn't have soaked the bran chunks. Flipped into banneton so the seam side was up, and dusted the now upper side (seam side) of boule. Immediately did finger poke test, and it seemed it was ready to bake!  So, it had too long of a bulk ferment, and therefore I used too much starter. Immediately started preheat of oven to *495/475 F  and also Lodge 3.2 qt combo cooker. (Had to adjust bake timings a bit due to doing laundry, not wanting to let laundry occupy community dryers too long.) Oiled and lightly dusted with corn meal, the deep pot part of the cooker. Sprinkled corn meal on seam side of boule and covered boule with a circle of parchment paper. Inverted pot over banneton and flipped them over.  Scored the boule in a double X, or 8 legged asterisk, all cuts converging in the center top. ~~[1 hour, 3 min final proof.] 5:20 pm: Bake, covered, *495/475 F, 5 min. 5:25 pm: Bake, covered, 475/455 F, 5 min. 5:30 pm: Bake, covered, 430/410 F, 20 min. Success!  Oven spring!  All legs of the 8-point asterisk scoring opened well. No "ears" because it was a vertical cut. 5:50 pm: Bake, uncovered, 400/380 F, 11 min. It didn't look like it was browning fast enough so raised temp. 6:01 pm: Bake, uncovered  410/390 F, 10 min. It didn't look like it was browning fast enough so raised temp again. 6:11 pm: Bake, uncovered, 420/400 F, 6 min. 6:17 pm: Done. Internal temp 209.7 F. * First number is the oven's thermostat setting, second number is actual. ~~ Total bake: 57 minutes. Very light crumb. BEST BAKE SO FAR.  And my friend who likes white bread even liked it.  Looked so good I cut it open after cooling two hours. Normally have to wait 20 hours to improve flavor. Forgot to take photos of crumb. Will post other photos when I get a new computer.
Way bigger loaf, it puffed up so tall it touched the top of my d.o. !
Followed some recommendations from Maurizio's recipe, adjusted the rest to suit my schedule/comfort zone. Feedback always welcome, I've only come so far with help from this community.Oatmeal50g quick oats soaked in water overnight then drained (used drained water for dough)12g flax seeds, soaked with oats (4 tsp)DoughWhole Foods 365 Organic AP flour 450g (70%)KAF whole wheat flour 150g (23%)Water 438g (use water from oats, 75%, including water absorbed by oats closer to 80%)Starter 100g (2:1 AP to whole wheat, hydrated at 100%) (17%)Salt 10g (1.5%)Things I learned1. Yes, definitely cover your loaf with an inverted pot if you don’t have a dutch oven to trap steam2. It’s not too damaging to divide your loaf and reshape again if you do it early3. Yes, I should’ve been doing a longer bulk ferment. My previous BFs were 1-2 hrs, this time it was 6 hours4. Starter really does make your dough more slack, I’m still trying to figure out how to work with it, not really sure I should have added it during the autolyse as Maurizio did. At least I managed to resist adding more water5. Measure everything! Even when I’m sneakily adding more water I should at least measure what I added so I can keep track and make appropriate changes next time.1. (7:45am) 1-hour autolyse with starter at 77-79F, add starter and 408g water first and mix, hold out 30g of water2. (8:15am) Add 10g salt and added all hold out water3. Bulk fermentation for 5 hours, fold oats into dough after first 30 minutes, stretch and fold every 30 minutes (forgot to weigh the soaked oats to find out how much water I was adding, calculated based on the final dough weight of 1.3kg that I probably added 40g max of water from oats)4. (1:15am) Cold ferment in fridge 7 hours5. (8:15) Preshaped then divided into two then pre-shaped again6. Pre-shape, circling dough tightly, then let rest for 20 minutes7. Preheat oven for an hour with oven-proof pot inside and cast iron pan under the baking stone8. Shape and proof, fold dough up into package and roll on surface to create a tight skin, roll boule over oats before final proof, seam side down on couche for 40 minutes at 74F. Dough was pretty wet and a little difficult to handle.9. Score and slide loaf in, spray generously with water10. Cover loaf with pot with overhang so steam can get in, pour water into cast iron, place ice onto baking stone11. Bake at 500 for 15 minutes then at 450F uncovered with convection for an additional 18 mins Soaked oats and flax, very wet even after draining for over an hour Had trouble incorporating it into the dough at first, didn't fold it into the layers as uniformly as I would've liked Dough came together well after first s&f Baking covered vs uncovered Covered loaf clearly had better oven spring. Pretty good crumb, any feedback? Maybe a little underbaked. This is a cross-section of the uncovered loaf, I haven't cut into the other one yet but I might post updates. It's got a weird distribution of hole sizes, many really big ones, and the rest are tiny, not many in-between. Why is that? Cross section of the covered loaf. So yummy. It's a bread I highly recommend, anyone interested should probably check out the original recipe.
I am new to bread baking (about 9 months) and am glad to find a community of bakers, amateur and professional, that truly enjoy sharing their stories. I love the discussions about successful and not so successful baking adventures. I’ve quickly learned that there is no such thing as a bad loaf of bread if it has some of the baker’s heart and soul in it. I started baking after being encouraged by my wife to try something new. I’m a retired US Army infantry officer and about 10 years ago I was diagnosed with PTSD after three combat deployments.Years of therapy has helped me cope with day-to-day life and heal parts of myself. Yet I was yearning for more. Then, I found bread. I received a copy of Chad Robertson’s Tartine Bread from my wife and started to read. Long before I started my sourdough starter (which I am still using) I found myself drawn to the stories. What I quickly discovered, as you all know, is that bread is a living thing. There is a connection between the baker and the bread. This connection extends to those who get to enjoy in the fruits of the baker’s efforts. Baking has become more than way to fill the dinner table with healthy food. Ok, the lunch and breakfast and snack tables get filled too. Baking is a way to connect to myself and others. It is not the only, or even the primary, tool in my therapy plan. But it is a really nice addition to it. I have added sprouted Einkorn, semolina and buckwheat to my basic country white sourdough repertoire over the last few months. The sourdough is still my go-to bread, while the others are for fun and experimentation. I recently bought a Komo Fidbus 21and started experimenting with home milled flours (with mixed results, but I’m keeping notes in my log). I want to thank everyone for sharing their stories and tips. I’ve picked up a few pointers from here already and I hope I can share my adventures to help others along the way. Cheers.
My wife was craving cinnamon rolls Sunday morning, so I figured I'd give them a shot. I used the recipe in The Baker's Apprentice, with the exception that I omitted the lemon zest. Overall, I liked working with this enriched dough. The addition of the egg and sugar made it a bit different than my usual bread dough, but it ended up with a very nice consistency. One thing I noticed as I was working, though, is that there seems to be limited rise during the first ferment. I think this was due to the fact that we keep our home very cool (about 68° F). I've noticed this with other breads I've made, and resolved the issue by placing the dough on one of our floor heating vents. That way, it gets a blast of warm air every so often. With these, I kept them off to the side of the vent, so they didn't get as much direct heat. The end result was a large oven spring, and a chewy, more dense roll than I've had before. The filling was good, and I did not make any icing for them. Questions that came up during this bake: - With such a low room temperature during mixing, should I be trying to find/create a warmer space to ferment the dough? - I omitted lemon zest from the recipe, and am wondering how that may have altered things. Is this purely a flavor thing, or does the zest somehow alter the dough consistency? - I used Lactaid 2% for the milk in this recipe, which lacks lactose. This is the milk we generally use at home, but I'm wondering if the lack of lactose may have an impact on the result? Not that it was bad, but the consistency was different from "traditional" cinnamon rolls. Sorry for the poor picture quality, had to use a different phone for this.
I felt that I could take the Pan de Cristal a further step if I kept at it.  And so I did.  Further micro improvements from last time. The first that I went with but abandoned after two attempts was to combine a biga with a levain.  While the results were okay, they were not all that much better than with just a straight levain mix. The downside is that it has an additional few steps to accomplish without the payback.  So I abandoned that process and returned to a single preferment - the 100% hydration strong white flour levain. Other breakthroughs, beyond those reported last time, included: There’s no getting around that this dough is still a trick to wrangle with, but I think that I finally unlocked the door to producing a quality Pan de Cristal. Here's a partial stack from previous runs these past few days. When loaded into the oven, these plump up quite impressively, only to settle back down some after a while. The finished product.  These cannot be scaled, so eyeing the size of each baton is necessary. A bird's eye view of the runt of the lot that was not up for giveaway. And a snail's eye view. Looking in from the outside.  You can see how open the crumb is, and how thin the crust is on these breads.  A structural marvel.  The crust just shatters as it is bitten into, while the crumb stays moist and delicate. The formula for these is on the earlier entry. 4 x ~300g batons
Made a few adjustments.  Last bake was good,  but the crumb was waxy and still a little moist. Flavor was still very good though.  I lowered my hydration from 70 to 65 %. Plus I added the salt with the flour and blended all dry ingredients before adding my water and leaving. After mixing i let autolyse for 45 minutes and did 30 minutes of stretches and folds.  After that,  into the fridge for 7 hours.  In the morning I removed from fridge and placed in oven with the light on.  After supper I shaped and proofed in a banaton basket for 1 hour.  Then preheated my Dutch oven for 45 minutes at 500. Baked at 500 for 30 minutes with ther lid on.  Then I removed the lid and baked an additional 15 minutes. Crust looks good.  Cooling now will cut tomorrow.
Hi! This is my first Post and I'm hoping I can find some help here. I have been making no-knead breads using bread flower have also used bread flower with 25% whole wheat & 10% Rye. I have used quick acting, instant, & sourdough on different loaves. I have used the 1/4 to 1/2 tsp yeast with cool water & 8-24hr, 72deg 1st proofing as well as the 1 1/4 to 2 tsp yeast with warm water & 1 to 3 hr, 85deg 1st proofing. Everything through this step seems OK, My dough has lots of bubbles and has more than doubled in volume I degas, fold, & stretch the dough and place in a parchment lined container of appropriate size and shape for my 5qt dutch oven or my superstone bread baker. I give it a second proofing hoping it will double in size again; but it never does! All I ever get with the 2nd proofing is a 10 to 60% increase in volume. I have varied time and temperature to no avail. The better ones  are good and edible but not as light and airy as I would like. Have wondered about mixing some beer or vinegar with the water. Also wonder about adding baking powder. Would really appreciate any help! Thank You for any Response!
I think I've just made my favorite cake! My first bake for 2020! This was inspired by my torta, a modern cake on a cake traditionally made with lard, and a Spanish magdalena. I've been wanting to bake a magdalena ever since I saw it but it's only this time that I had the courage to try it, knowing how expensive olive oil can be and how I do not like it when I first tried it. The use of olive oil in it was so intriguing and interesting.Knowing that most of the flavor will come from the olive oil, I made sure to use a high quality extra virgin Spanish olive oil. An arbequina was the choice for most magdalenas because of its sweet, fruity, and delicate flavor. I used something stronger so the flavor will shine through the cakes.I used an olive oil made from a blend of picual (bitter and spicy) and hojiblanca (grassy and bitter). I tasted the oil straight up and it has a fruity smell reminiscent of banana.  It enters the palate smooth and sweet, followed by peppery notes, then a slight bitterness on the sides of the tongue and a spicy finish at the back of the throat.In addition to flour, milk, eggs, salt, sugar, and olive oil, I flavored it with a local orange. What pairing is more classic than olive oil and citrus, most magdalenas are flavored with lemon zest. Our local orange has an intense unique fragrance not even close to lime, lemon, or classic orange. Compared to orange, the aroma is more mabagsik (sorry, I can't think of direct translation, intense? fierce?); I once candied it and the peels were still extremely bitter after three times of blanching. Even just the green rind, without the pit, it is already bitter. The skin was also very thin that it is difficult to get only the green zest without the bitter white pith. With its intensity, I only needed a small amount to perfume the cake, just a quarter teaspoon. I never thought that sourdough would make a cake like this. I had a couple of more torta experiments (that I still have second thoughts of posting) before this and this is by far the best in terms of texture and flavor. This cake was purely raised by sourdough, no chemical or mechanical leavening. In my honest opinion, it was lighter, fluffier and more delicate that a traditional pound cake (that is, the one that is raised purely by air trapped in the batter during creaming). Sorry for the weird angle! I just love how smooth and fine the sides of the cake are. The cake had a very lovely flavor. The olive oil added an interesting savory note, if I did not know that there was olive oil, or if I were not familiar with it; I will be hard pressed to pinpoint were that flavor comes from. It tastes buttery despite the cake being made  solely with olive oil. It has nutty note too that if I also didn't know, I would think that there were almonds in it, probably due to the hojiblanca. Like a classic olive oil cake, it has a thin crispy shell at the top and an interior so moist  almost to the point of being custardy. After a day, the crust turned shiny and soft and the crumb became moister and the flavor also developed to becoming more balanced and harmonious. This is a cake that really benefits with age. If there is one word this cake is all about, it is subtlety. Subtly tangy, subtly sweet, subtly savory, subtly buttery, subtly nutty, subtly citrusy. This would go great with tea rather than coffee due to the delicate flavors.Earl grey if you want a tie of flavors; black tea for a classic palate cleanse between bites; or if you want something herby, tarragon tea will be nice. I just love those sunlit photos! They have a more organic and mysterious feel. It feels as if I was really in the Mediterranean! You can see in this photo the delicate and crispy top crust. In a made-up history, during Spanish times it was a celebrated dish found only on the tables of the wealthy as only the upper class can afford excellent olive oil from the Mediterranean. I became a litttle bit generous with the olive oil in the two molds and the oil floated on top of the batter. What a lovely pattern it created! Looks like a sunflower enhanced by the sunlight. I have never tasted a cake as sophisticated as this! I hope you enjoyed this olive oil cake. Until next time, thanks!
Some people paint sunflowers, I bake bread- until get good at it.  I decided that in order to really understand Pain de Campagne, I had to bake them actual size. This loaf is built from a hundred grams of starter, 600 grams water, 1,000 g bread flour, and 20 g salt. The starter was put in a big bowl, and a like volume of water mixed in, then enough flour to make a very soft dough. The refreshment was left covered to rise on the counter in a cool kitchen for a few hours.  More water was mixed in, and flour added to make a very soft dough, and left covered on the counter for a few hours.  The rest of the water was added, along with the salt, and flour added by handfuls. It was a lot of dough, so stretched and folded every hour for a few hours instead of straight kneading. The dough was rounded up, bench rest, shaped, and allowed to rise in a salad spinner lined with a cloth. When the dough had proofed, it was turned out onto a piece of parchment paper on a peel, and gently slid into the oven. It was baked on a stone in a preheated oven  at 400F convection for 25 minutes, then 15 minutes at 375F convection, and a final 5 minutes at 325F convection. It is "golden brown" but looks paler because of the flour on it.  There is 600 grams of water in the dough-  that makes a lot of steam. My glasses fogged up from the steam coming out of the oven when I moved the loaf as I turned the oven down to 325F. One reason for moving the loaves when I turn the oven down is to release steam out of the oven for a crisp crust. With a good electric oven, there is no need to fuss with putting water in the oven -that extra water just cools the oven.
I made one bread according to Forkish's recipe (half the amount of flour, water, etc. that is listed in the book). In the  morning the polish had not developed that well partly due to the kitchen being a bit colder overnight. I had some sourdough starter left that I had used to rebuild my starter. So I added 70g of this active starter (rye, 100@ hydration) to the whole mix. I used an oblong cloches for baking. I'm very happy with the result. The darker rye did not mix completely with the rest of the dough and one can still see some guy streaks in the bread. The taste is very mild.
I have never baked a ciabatta in all the years of baking. I wanted to take some nice bread to friends for late afternoon drinks that would pair nicely with cheese and selected wines. My usual bake for these events is baguettes with a poolish, but I wanted to try something. I went with Hamelman's ciabatta with biga which is a 73% hydration loaf. The result was better than I was expecting, The crumb is not as open as some prefer, but I don't like the holes so large that the toppings fall through. I may experiment with upping the hydration a few points to test my nerve. Cheers, Gavin.
Being a twin and the 2nd one born, my twin has always said I was a real 'Born Loser'.  But this year's birthday is a very special one because my birthday is on 02-02-2020 .....the same day as the Super Bowl.  It seems fitting that my Chiefs are favored to win by 2 by the bookies.  But they are oh so wrong!  I think the Chiefs will win by 20.  So I'm taking the 200 to 1 odds that they will do so and putting 20 bucks on it.  I'm getting ready to celebrate their huge 20 point win by making pizza in the toaster oven using home made tortillas....... and washing it down with a bottle of 20 year old Amarone that I paid about $20 for so long ago! The only thing that would be better is if I was going to be 20 years old this Sunday instead of ...........68! Lucy says to have a salad with that pizza!
This is the same basic formula as my last post except this time I added some cranberries and reduced the egg amount slightly.  I love the flavor of these rolls and they are worth giving them a try as I know you will not be disappointed.  Keep in mind this is a pretty wet dough and is not the easiest to form into rolls.  I used wet hands and a dough scraper to help me.  I don't like adding a lot of extra flour when shaping rolls, but you can certainly do that if you desire, just don't end up making them too dry. I would suggest adding more cranberries than I did which was less than desired due to that is what I had left in the house. Download the BreadStorm File here. Levain Directions Mix all the levain ingredients together  for about 1 minute and cover with plastic wrap.  Let it sit at room temperature for around 7-8 hours or until the starter has doubled.  I used my proofer set at 83 degrees and it took about 4 hours.  You can use it immediately in the final dough or let it sit in your refrigerator overnight. Porridge Directions Add about 3/4's of the milk called for in the porridge to the dry ingredients including the cranberries in a small pot set to low and stir constantly until all the milk is absorbed.  Add the remainder of the milk, plus the Greek yogurt and keep stirring until you have a nice creamy and soft porridge.    Remove from the heat and let it come to room temperature before adding to the dough.  I put mine in the refrigerator and let it cool quicker. Main Dough Procedure Mix the flours, egg yolks and the water for about 1 minute.  Let the rough dough sit for about 20 minutes to an hour.  Next add the levain, cooled porridge, butter, honey and salt and mix on low for 5 minutes. Remove the dough from your bowl and place it in a lightly oiled bowl or work surface and do several stretch and folds.  Let it rest covered for 10-15 minutes and then do another stretch and fold.  Let it rest another 10-15 minutes and do one additional stretch and fold.  After a total of 2 hours place your covered bowl in the refrigerator and let it rest for 12 to 24 hours.  (Since I used my proofer I only let the dough sit out for 1.5 hours before refrigerating). When you are ready to bake remove the bowl from the refrigerator and let it set out at room temperature still covered for 30 minutes.  Remove the dough and shape as desired.  This is a pretty wet and sticky dough.  I don't like to add a lot of extra flour when making rolls so I used wet hands and a dough scraper to help me shape the rolls.  Each roll was around 150 grams total weight. The dough will take 1.5 to 2 hours depending on your room temperature and will only rise about 1/3 it's size at most.  Let the dough dictate when it is read to bake not the clock. Around 45 minutes before ready to bake, pre-heat your oven to 515 degrees F. and prepare it for steam.  I have a heavy-duty baking pan on the bottom rack of my oven with 1 baking stone on above the pan and one on the top shelf.  I pour 1 cup of boiling water in the pan right after I place the dough in the oven. Right before you are ready to put them in the oven, score as desired and then add 1 cup of boiling water to your steam pan or follow your own steam procedure. Lower the temperature to 435 degrees. Take the rolls out of the oven when they are nice and brown which should take around 15 - 20 minutes and let it cool on a bakers rack before for at least 2 hours before eating. I also decided to make a loaf out of part of the dough which you can see below.
This is another twist on Hamelman’s 5 grain levain. I am using the same amounts as my last attempt at this but once again, I tweaked the method and I did not sift out the bran. I am also going to do some bassinage with this dough as my notes from the last time indicated that this was a stiff dough as well. Recipe: Makes 3 loaves Soaker: 100 g cracked rye berries (coarsely mill 125 g of rye berries) 86 g raw sunflower seeds 86 g old fashioned oats (large flake) 25 g black sesame seeds 75 g flax seeds (freshly ground) 7 g salt 448 g boiling water Levain: 70 g starter (2 stage refreshment procedure in recipe) 275 g strong baker’s unbleached flour 345 g filtered water Extra wholegrain flour to bring the levain up to speed Dough: 550 g strong baker’s unbleached flour 50 g Spelt flour 50 g Kamut flour 50 g Einkorn flour 50 g Rye flour 77 g Durum flour 30 g plain yogurt 330 g filtered water + 40 g divided in 10 g portions (extra water is for bassinage) 21 g Pink Himalayan salt The two nights before: Take 3 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 6 g of filtered water and 6 g of wholegrain flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 30 g of water and 30 g of wholegrain flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the day. The night before: Levain: 12 to 16 hours before the the final mixing of the dough, add the 275 g of strong baker’s unbleached flour and the 345 g of water to the levain and keep covered at room temperature (70 F). Soaker: Coarsely mill the rye berries to crack them. I sifted out the fine flour and only used the coarse parts. To the rye, add the sunflower seeds, the oats and the black sesame seeds. Toast in a 350 F oven or in a dry frying pan until lightly golden and fragrant. Grind the flax seeds in a “Bullet” or coffee grinder and add to the toasted seeds. To the toasted seeds, add the salt and the boiling water. Stir, cover and let cool overnight. Flour: Mill and measure out the flours from all the grains needed for the dough. Place the flours in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. Reserve. Dough making day: Place the dough water in the bottom of a mixing bowl, add the reserved flours, the yogurt and 620 g of the levain. Using a stand mixer, mix on the lowest speed until you have a shaggy dough with no dry flour. Let sit for one hour. Add the 21 g of pink salt and 10 g of water to the dough and mix on speed 1 for 9 minutes. Add the seed soaker and mix another minute or two on speed 2 until all the seeds are evenly distributed. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Add the first 10 g water on top. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds (adding an extra 10 g water each time) at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds (coil folds) at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 40%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and bubbles on top as well. Things were moving along so it only took another 30 minutes. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~890 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and cross over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. Sprinkle a  mix of rice flour and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more.
I had another go at this bake, but made a few mistakes right at the start.  Rather than using the recommended 214 g of bread flour and 109 g of water for the final dough, I accidentally use 321 g bread flour and 243 g of water which I reduced to 236 from the total formula column, yikes.  Other changes I made include reducing the soaker water to 150 g. I’m quite happy with the end product considering the accidental changes I made.  This was the largest loaf of bread I’ve made to date and it kind of overflowed my banneton which is better sized for 750 g loaves.  So taking that into consideration I’m pleased.
465 g all-purpose, 390 g whole what, 50 g rye, 81% hydration, retarded bulk fermentation, short retarded proofing, 55 mins on baking stone ∴ single 1556g loaf
Loaf 1 - 100% wholewheat, 450g90% hydration30% starter2% saltLong overnight autolyse in fridge.Also proofed overnight in fridge and baked in the morning.Baked at ~230c for 20 mins covered & 20 mins uncovered This worked out well - a beautiful colour and tasted great. Alas, needed more time in the oven, and the crumb wasn't as open as I would have liked. Also, I used the wrong baking paper and it stuck to the bottom! --- Loaf 2 - white/wholewheat mix, 500g.40% white flour10% white stone-ground flour25% wholegrain wheat flour25% wholegrain spelt flour80% hydration15% starter2% salt 1 hour autolyse.Proofed overnight in fridge and baked in the morning.Baked at ~230c for 20 mins covered & 20 mins uncoveredTurned out really nice. Again, could have done with a bit more time in the oven for darker crust and less gummy interior. --- Loaf 3 - white/wholewheat mix, 500g.50% white flour25% wholegrain wheat flour25% wholegrain spelt flour80% hydration15% starter2% salt 1 hour autolyse.Bulk ferment + proof on same day. Proof over 2-3 hrs at room temp. Dough stuck to tea towel.Baked at ~230c for 25 mins covered & 25 mins uncoveredLeft to cool overnight Rose significantly in oven despite it sticking to tea towel. Result was definitely as good as the overnight proof from Loaf 2. It benefited from a longer cooking time, though still feels a little gummy. -- Moving forward: Loaf 3 is my benchmark. I'm curious to try this with 70-75% hydration to see what happens. I also want to try Jose's alternative 18hr bulk ferment for a very open crumb. If that works, I want to try the same thing with 70-100% wholewheat flour.
Changes compared to round 1 1. Accidentally made the hydration way too high.2. Add-ins were ~29% total flour weight compared to ~38% last time. Didn’t soak the nuts and dates beforehand though, and forgot to toast the walnuts3. Baked for much longer and at a lower temperature, seems like I could have still baked for even longer4. Let the starter grow for 3 hours instead of 1.5 hours, rise of the dough was much better this time Things I might change 1. Bulk ferment was still relatively short at 2.5 hours, I had to go to bed. Would try 4-5 hour bulk ferment next time.2. Was it under or over-proofed? I’m not sure anymore, see video below.3. Would bake for even longer Steps Starter 150 g (100% hydration)AP flour 300 g (total flour weight 525 g)Whole wheat flour 150 gWater 364 g (84% hydration)Salt 12 g80 g chopped walnuts (forgot to toast)70 g dates1. Feed starter (70g starter fed 30g AP flour, 10g whole wheat flour, 40g water)2. Mix flour and water and autolyse for 3 hrs3. Dimple starter into dough and gently fold to incorporate4. Add walnuts and dates5. 4 rounds s&f in 20 minute intervals, total 2.5 hour bulk ferment6. 20-hour cold ferment7. 1 last S&F to help release dough from the bowl, divide into two, tightly shape then bench rest for 1 hr8. Shape, 30-minute final proof on floured baking paper9. Score, spritz with water10. Bake at 480 F covered with steam for 15 mins11. Uncover, remove steak and bake with convection at 450 F for 20 mins, 400 F for 15 with foil, last 5 minutes with the bread upside-down
With a rainy day off work, this past Tuesday I decided to make some sourdough bread. I fed my sourdough starter (composed of King Arthur bread flour) that afternoon, which left me until that evening to decide on what recipe I would follow. Being a fan of Richard Bertinet, I eventually decided to use a version of his “White Sourdough” recipe from his book, “Crumb”. This is a great book for all things bread, by the way. I highly recommend it! So, around 7:30 P.M., I mixed up the bread. The formula was as follows: Obviously the ingredients for this bread are quite simple. It’s also fairly easy to work with, being only 72% hydration. Once I had combined all of the above ingredients, I kneaded it (by slap-and-fold) until it passed the windowpane test. All in all, I’d say it took around 10 minutes to build the gluten structure properly. After then letting it rest for about an hour at around 80 degrees F (in our water heating room), I gave it a fold on the counter. It then went back into the bowl to rest for yet another hour, at which point it passed the “poke” test. Now the bread was ready for its final proof. I dumped it onto the counter, divided it in half, and roughly formed the halves into boule shapes. I then let it rest on the counter for about 25 minutes. After this time, I shaped one of the boules into a batard, and I reformed the other into a boule. Into the proofing baskets and subsequently to the fridge they went. They proofed for a total of 14 hours at around 38-40 degrees F before being baked. I loaded them onto my baking stone at 475 degrees F on the oven’s convection bake setting, after which I dumped about a cup of water into the bottom of the oven for steam (it is built like a tray to hold water, intended for the steam cleaning setting). After 5 minutes, I turned the oven down to 425 degrees F and baked for another 20 minutes. Then it was turned down to 400 degrees F and baked for yet another 5-10 minutes. This was the result... Have a good weekend everyone.
This experiment worked out very well.  It's an everyday bread that I'll be using. It has no egg, only milk, and is suitably simple to use even if you're retired and aren't up for a kneading session.  Most Celiac diagnoses happen after mid-life, so my series is meant to empower everyone to make their own bread, even if they're limited in mobility.  My focus is on nutrition and simplicity.  Please comment and tell me what you think.  There is more detail in the article I'm linking to, but the recipe is reprinted here with a picture of the crumb. The texture is very similar to a classic rye bread.  Which shouldn't be surprising, I baked many a rye loaf when I was able to eat gluten. Link:  https://www.nixgluten.com/2020/02/gluten-free-whole-grain-rice-buckwheat.html The big surprise is that processed starches weren't needed to make a very nice bread machine bread that's gluten free. I always suspected that.  Now here's the proof. So far it hasn't lasted longer than two days, to check for staling. :)  It doesn't even stick tot he knife when you cut it.  I had a problem with that when I was using egg as a protein network. Not that those breads weren't delish, but this is more recognizably bread and less like a cake that tastes like bread. A great tasting gluten free bread, equally good with stew or as french toast.  Allergens: Contains Milk Equipment:West Bend 1-3 lb Hi Rise Bread machine --  Whole Wheat Cycle 2.5 lbs, Dark CrustVitamix 5200 with Dry grind attachment  Baker's percentages and grams are used. Excluding soaker, 100% hydration.Soaker:  30g chia seeds + 70g water (set aside for 5-10 min to thicken) 400g rice flour (I fresh ground mine,  this is a good one) 200g buckwheat flour (I fresh ground it, this is a good one) 600g whole milk  (100%) 15g vinegar (2.5%) 15g oil  (2.5%) 15g turbinado sugar (2.5%) 1 packet Rapid Rise yeast (or Bread Machine yeast, or Instant Yeast, these are the same)     *that's 7g in a packet or around 1% also 6g guar gum (1%)  with the chia also, you don't need much of this 6g salt Combine, flours, guar gum, and salt in a bowl and set aside. In the Bread machine container, add milk, sugar and soaker. On top of the milk mixture, put the flours mixture.  Don't stir.  Make a hole or channel in the top, and put the yeast there. Along the side, slide in the oil and vinegar, just before starting the machine.  That is to say, set the settings for the machine, pour in the oil/vinegar, and press Start.  Since we're using milk and vinegar, I'd rather not take a chance at curdling the milk. My machine takes 3 and 1/2 hours for the whole wheat cycle. Don't open it in the last stage of rising and baking, it can collapse, otherwise, feel free to scrape the sides down in earlier stages if you feel it needs it.  But it shouldn't need that. This dough works pretty well, hands off.Important Note:  Using a thermometer I've noticed that the bread in a bread machine doesn't always get to fully cooked temperatures.  This is even more important when you're baking gluten free.  So either use a thermometer that can monitor the temperature and beep when it's at 210 degrees F in the center of the loaf, or do what I do....  leave it on Keep Warm after it's finished for another 45-60 minutes, then cool on the countertop for another 2-12 hours.  All this is before slicing. It will be worth the wait.
Loaf 4 - 250gwhite flour, 250g wholegrain wheat flour.70% hydration15% starter2% salt Made sponge overnight by mixing starter (straight from fridge) with 200g flour and 70% water.The next morning, did 1 hour autolyse with remaining 300g flour and 70% water. Used scoop & stretch method twice to combine, then roughly 4 hour bulk rise with 5 stretch and folds. 2 hour proof on baking paper in bowl, covered with plastic. Baked at ~230c for 20 mins covered & 30 mins uncoveredLeft to cool for a few hours. Good result, though not better than the last loaf, so doesn't warrant the additional steps. Considering it was 10% less hydration, the result was good.
I made this sourdough yesterday and baked it this morning. I really feel like it’s the best whole grain I’ve made to date. It’s 30% whole grain that I milled at home with my new Komo Grain Mill. I used 10% each hard spring red, 10% hard spring white, and 10% soft spring white. I’m not sure why I used those ratios but it seemed right at the time. The other 70% is King Arthur AP. I went with 80% hydration over the usual 75% for my go to sourdough. Bulk rise time was 7 hrs vs 5 hours. All other variables were the same that I’ve come to like. The final proof was 12 hours in the fridge. I like this for two reason. Number one is flavor, flavor flavor. Number two is the ease of handling when scoring and transferring to the Dutch oven. I’m pretty excited about the results and want to keep making adjustments on time, hydration, temp., etc. How do I get the same or close to the same rise and crumb? I’ve read some other tips on other baking sites but they all lack the personal story element. And that what I like most about The Fresh Loaf. I’d appreciate any stories about early adventures with home milled sourdoughs. I still have a lot to learn. Good thing I treat every loaf I make as a tasty stop on the bread baking journey. Cheers!,
The inspiration for this bread is David Snyder’s Fig Walnut recipe. I followed it pretty closely but I subbed out dates instead of figs since I had some that needed to be used up. I also used a stand mixer rather than doing it by hand. And of course, I can’t forget the yogurt to tenderize the crust! Recipe Makes 3 loaves Levain: 158 g strong bakers unbleached flour 40 g freshly milled Selkirk wheat flour (Selkirk wheat berries) 158 g filtered water 40 g sourdough starter Dough: 594 g strong bakers unbleached flour 92 g freshly milled Selkirk wheat flour (Selkirk wheat berries) 194 g freshly milled rye flour (Rye berries) 682 g filtered water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g local yogurt 220 g toasted walnut pieces 220 g chopped dates 396 g levain Make sure to refresh your starter a couple of times before making the levain. The night before: Mill the needed grains if you mill your own flour. Cover and set aside. Toast the walnuts in a 300 F oven for 9 minutes. Cool. Chop the dates, add to the walnuts and reserve. Dissolve  the sourdough starter in the water for the levain. Add the flours listed for the levain to the bowl, mix well and let the levain rise at room temperature until it doubles (8 - 12 hours). Dough making day: The next morning, a couple of hours before the levain is ready, place the dough water in a mixing bowl. Add the dough flours and mix on speed one of a mixer for a couple of minutes until you have a shaggy dough with no dry flour. Let sit for a couple of hours. After the autolyse, add the salt, the yogurt and the levain to the mixing bowl. Mix for a minute to integrate everything and then mix on speed 2 for 9 minutes. Add the walnuts and the dates, and mix only until everything is evenly distributed. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds (coil folds) at 60 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 40%. This took another 2 and a half hours. It’s a very slow moving dough due to the amount of fruit and nuts in it. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~815 g. Gently round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 1 hour on the counter. Do a final shape by flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Gently overlap the edges of the dough in the center. Flip over and pull the dough towards you on all sides to seal the bottom. Be super gentle not to degas the dough. Did I mention to be gentle with this dough? 😂 Sprinkle a  mix of rice flour and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons and cover. Let rise for an hour and a half in a warm spot and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 425 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 400 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. Next time, I would do only one set of folds rather than 2 in the first hour. This dough is heavy and needs time to rise. As well, I dropped the temperature of baking on the second batch as the bottom of the loaves from the first batch baked up pretty dark. The recipe reflects the lowered temperature.
I learned to cook by going out to the garden and picking vegetables, and then going down to the hen house and seeing who had stopped laying, was ready to be dinner.  That taught me an improvisational style of cooking - cooking as a form of jazz - the garden produces similar products over a period of weeks, and one cooks variations on a theme, because every day the basket from the garden varies, but there are themes that carry over from day to day and from week to week.  That calls for improv bread. Certainly there is always pita, but . . . . Many of the recipes for pain de compagnon take days to produce - more of requiem than jazz.  However, if you have a very good sourdough starter, you can make a very good pain de compagnon that  can be served for supper. (If you start first thing in the morning.)  That is, sourdough starter to baked loaf in 10 hours, and that is a loaf that can be served after only an hour of cooling. My approach: starting first thing in the morning ; I weigh 12 grams of salt, 400 grams of bread flour, and 200 grams of whole wheat or high extraction flour into a container. I measure out 400 ml of water into a (canning jar.)(Canning jars have volume marks that are close enough for this kind of bread. I put 100 grams of starter in the kettle of my stand mixer, add 1/4 of the water in the canning  jar, and enough of the whole wheat flour on the top of the flour container to make a batter. I split a plastic bag to cover the kettle with the dough hook in place, and let the "first refreshment" rise till bubbly - a couple of hours. I add a third of the water remaining in the jar to the kettle, and enough flour to again make a batter, cover and let ferment on the counter. At this time, I put a teaspoon of yeast and a teaspoon of flour in the jar, and let rise on the counter. After lunch, I add the water/yeast in  the jar to the kettle, and stir in the flour/salt from the flour container into the kettle by hand-fulls to make a shaggy dough. I let the flour hydrate for half an hour, and use the dough hook to knead the dough, adjusting the water/flour to make a dough the consistency of baguette dough. I take the dough hook out and let rise at 85F (proof setting in my oven) for an hour. About 2 pm I turn the dough out on the bench, round up, bench rest, shape the loaf, and set to rise in a floured, fabric lined colander at 85F About 3:30 pm I take the dough out of the oven, and preheat the baking stone to 375F. About 4 pm I put a piece of parchment paper on the peel, turn the risen dough onto the parchment paper, lash the loaf, and slide it into bakestone in the 375F convection oven. It will need about 45 minutes to bake. After an hour on a cooling rack, it will have set enough to be served at a 6 pm supper. This approach uses a few hacks. First, the sourdough rises faster in a whole wheat batter.  The sourdough bacteria started at room temperature dominate the dough to provide a mild flavor, sourdough texture, and reasonable keeping qualities. The yeast have time to multiply, and form a poolish flavor. The yeast and bread flour combine to provide a moderate density crumb with good volume - this big bread.   I think big loaves have better texture and flavor. And the yeast/bread flour allows the loaf to set quickly as it cools. These loaves will make huge Reuben sandwiches that do not leak melted cheese or Russian dressing.  Many bakery loaves of this size - leak. I stone grind my own whole wheat and high-extraction flour. The grain mix usually contains ~5% rye and often at bit of spelt or kamut or both.  My fresh ground flour seems to allow faster sourdough fermentation than any of the commercial flours I have tried.  On the other hand, the bread flour I use is optimized for yeast, and allows faster yeast fermentation than my normal stone ground flour.  If I wanted faster yeast fermentation in whole wheat, I would sprout, dry, and grind some of my grain berry mix. The commercial white bread flour gives much better volume than my stone ground whole grain flours.  When I am serving herring with cream sauce, the bread is 100% whole grain, and dense enough not to leak, with enough flavor to stand up to the herring.
Quite a while back, I was seeking information how to get a chewier, more elastic crumb in my sourdough loaves. I was advised regarding protein content of flour and going for a higher hydration, and I would like to say a big THANKS to the several bakers who advised higher hydration, because it really did the trick. I did have to figure out that 75-80% hydration means 750 or 800 GM water to 1000 GM flour, so it is 75% or 80% by weight. Then you have to convert that to cups for conventional measuring in the kitchen.  I threw in a 45 minute autolyse before mixing the proofed starter into the dough. Now my bread has the texture we enjoy and my husband raves about it—and eats it all up.  Good thing I have a great mixer. (Ankersrum Assistent). Thanks for the help.
Greetings Everyone, I am a 74-year-old man, and I recently began to experiment with sourdough starter.  Actually, I never baked bread at all until last week:  I baked some bread just to use up the free flour that I received from commodity (for the first time). Anyway, I came across several warnings about sourdough starters:  Some claim that the starter can be deadly if not properly made or properly maintained.  If the information is correct, why have I never heard of anyone actually dying from eating bad home-made bread. I am scared to share my bread with my 76-year-old sister.  Please comment, I am not joking. Thank you,
I finally got around to having a go using a Beer Barm, the flour was 20% wholemeal flour with 80% Black and Gold  supermarket  flour. The Beer Barm was from the residue in the bottom of the fermenter from a home brew that i did before Christmas, a London Porter. The  barm is grown on like you do with a S/D starter  given a few feeds  and in this case used at a rate of 25% in the dough. the dough had a very nice aroma no doubt from the maltiness of the LP. Suprisingly this dough was very slow taking around 9 hours to bulk ferment and a further 3 hours to proof in a banneton. It was baked in a dutch oven lid on for 15 minutes lid off for a further 25. This loaf had great flavour and mouth feel no doubt in part from the long fermentation period, i wasnt in any hurry anyway.
Much improved this week.  After last week I did some TLC to my starter.  I had been using it and then feeding it and sticking right back into the fridge until the next bake. I wasn't giving it any feeding before I baked. So I got some rye flour and several  50/50 rye/bread flour feedings to build it back up. I also experimented with different feeding ratios.  I did a 1:1:1, then a  1:5:5, followed by a  1:3:3, before I settled on a 1:4:4. The last one gave me what I wanted,  and that was the ability to feed once in the morning before I left for work. The starter would go through a complete cycle of rise and collapse in about  24 hours being left in room ambient temperature...about 62 to 68 degrees.  Feeding it in the morning would put it near peak by 8 PM when I would use it in my bread. Still a young levain. I increased my hydration from  65 to 67%, also my flour from 400 to 450 grams.  Salt 2% and I increased my levain from 15 to 20%. I noticed the dough felt much better. Last week it was stiff and hard to work with. This was more in line with my expectations.  After mixing and a 30 minute autolyse I kneaded it doing a lot of stretch and folds for 15 to 20 minutes. Then I let it do a bulk rise, long and slow...approximately 16 hours. The next evening after supper i shaped and put in my banaton basket for the final proof while I preheated my Dutch oven at 500 degrees for 30 minutes.  Then I baked it at 500 for 30 minutes with the lid on.  Then I removed the lid and baked another 15.
Can you bring some bread for our old friends gathering?  Sure can, so this is what i put together  i chose to do 20% wholemeal breads,  some sticks using fresh compressed yeast with butter and an egg in the mix . After hand mixing the dough was split into two one half getting an addition of chopped apricots and soaked fennel seeds the other half getting white sesame and dark malted whole barley grains.  i had made a sourdough loaf the day before and that was cold retarded overnight in the fridge this was straight mixed and 4 hour bulk fermented no stretch and folds,  1 hour after shaping on the bench in its banneton then o/n in the fridge, it followed the sticks into the oven it was baked in a dutch oven.  im sure the folks are going to be happy with these!
The first in a series of experiments on my 'Loaf 3' recipe. Loaf 5 250g white flour, 250g wholegrain wheat flour.80% hydration15% starter2% salt Experiment: Refreshed starter overnight. In the morning, did 1 hour autolyse, then mixed in starter & salt. 4 stretch & folds over 2 hours, then a bulk ferment at (cool-ish) room temp for about 5-6 hours. Pre-shaped and let rest for 30 mins Proofed in a glass bowl, at room temp for about 2-2.5 hours.Baked in dutch oven at ~230c for 20 mins covered, 30 mins uncovered. Let cool overnight. Result: it seems like refreshing the starter has resulted in bigger air holes, a more open crumb. The crumb itself feels a little dry, though that could be because of the cooling overnight. Overall I'm happy with this, and it seems like refreshing is a good idea. Also, I was more 'intuitive' with this bake, in the sense that I tracked bulk rise to make sure it had risen and had a few air holes before moving on. What to try next: Slashing the top before baking!
I had cooked white rice and mixed (black and brown) rice in hand so I decided to add in using an adapted brown rice porridge bread recipe from the book, Chad Robertson's Tartine Book No. 3. The ingredients are: Spelt flour 50% Whole wheat flour 50% Water 85% Leaven 15% Sea salt 2.5% Cooked mixed rice 70% 30 min autolyse, 4 hour bulk fermentation (4 sets of stretch and fold), cold-proof in the fridge for about 18 hours. Preheat 480F, then bake at 450F in a dutch oven for 20 mins with a lid, 20 mins without a lid. I love the crust. So crisp and not too thick. I wish I could reproduce this kind of crust every time I bake! Crumb was moist and chewy. Unlike other porridge breads such as oatmeal or corn porridge bread, the crumb was not so soft and velvety. It rather resembles that of cracked wheat porridge bread I've baked. The aroma of the spelt flour seems to overpower other ingredients. I wonder what it would be like if I used just wheat flour as in the original recipe. Overall, it was a very scrumptious & aromatic experiment. Porridge breads never disappoint :)
I've been having real trouble with my baguettes but finally found something that works. As a semi Frenchmen, I've found I need to take matters into my own hands when it comes to baguettes. sourdough recipe. 60% hydration 95F 100% bread flour (Bobs Red Mill) 2% starter - I will vary this depending on the ambient temp to control for time. 1% salt autolyze 1hr salt in and slap + fold until incorporated and smooth maybe 5 min Ferment on the counter at 55-60 18-24hrs This was a major part of the learning curve. I pay no attention to time only the development of the bread. If things are slow I wait. If they are moving too fast I put the dough in the fridge. Cut and weigh for 250g pieces in the am with a rough tuck and shape. 1hr rest roll out to baguettes and place in a couche while the oven heats 30-45 I have a 1/2" steel plate in the oven along with a 4" deep 12x20 hotel pan. Note that I have a baking steel I cook literally everything on. I picked this one up at a steelyard from their discarded cuts and paid $19 US for it spent an hour removing the mill scale and couldn't be happier. Preheat on the broil setting for 30-40 I pull the rack out and place 2 baguettes on the steel. Because the steel is preheated I do have time. The whole motion likely takes under a minute but I'm sure I have several minutes before this would be a problem. lame the baguettes throw in an ice cube or two right onto the steel and cover with the hotel pan push the shelf in and close it up. oven goes to 450 from there. When I smell bread I pull the cover (hotel pan) and let it brown. The hotel pan makes things a whole lot easier and I'm finally consistently seeing ears on my loaves
No sifting bran, no autolyse, turned out way better than I thought, fluffy and even crumb not dense at all😋
Hi, I was inspired by some recipes I saw here. I didn't end up following any in particular because of my busy schedule. At this point I sort of have a standard protocol which involves roughly autolysing and stretching and folding the dough whenever I get home in the evening, bulk fermenting up till I go to bed, then cold fermenting until I get home the next day. It's worked well for me, this loaf was soo yummy, but I do have a few questions. Questions 1. Why do I get such a bimodal distribution of large and small bubbles, as in why do I have so many huge bubbles and many tiny ones, but few in-between?2. Do people usually add steam to their DO? I lined the bottom with foil and slipped 3 cubes of ice down the side when I first loaded the loaf. This is my first time using a dutch oven. Maybe the DO is why this loaf had the lightest, crispiest crumb I’ve had yet. I know I didn’t S&F very consistently, maybe the lack of gluten development and short bulk ferment led to the inconsistent crumb. I'm guessing I shouldn't put the dough straight into the fridge after my last S&F? Ingredients 250 g AP flour50 g WW flour226 g water (78% hydration)5 g salt (1.5% salt, lowered to adjust for salinity from olives)0.5 g IDY (roughly a pinch, to make up for the slow starter)70 g starter (fed 8 hours prior with 3:1:4 AP:WW:water) Steps These steps are just what I ended up doing and probably aren't ideal. I recommend anyone interested to refer to these two recipes. 1. Feed starter in the morning2. 8 hours later mix flour, water (minus 20 g), IDY, and starter and autolyse for 40 mins3. Use remaining water to help incorporate the salt into the dough4. Let the dough sit for 30 mins and then add the olives and herbs5. S&F roughly every 30 minutes 6 times6. 20-hour cold ferment (refrigerated right after the last S&F) total bulk ferment roughly 4 hrs7. Remove dough from fridge and let sit at RT for 20 minutes8. Pre-shape dough and rest for another 20 minutes9. Preheat DO and oven to 500 F, line bottom of DO with foil, leaving one corner folded up10. Shape dough and final proof on floured couche for 40 minutes11. Score and load loaf with floured baking paper12. Slip 3 cubes of ice into DO, ideally under the folded-up corner of foil, so the water doesn’t come in direct contact with the dough13. Bake at 500 F, covered, for 15 mins14. Bake at 450 F with convection uncovered, for another 30 mins15. Rest in cracked oven for 20 minutes, cool before slicing
I am beyond happy with this! It turned out better than all previous loaves, though I'm unsure why... My 'intuitive' approach is definitely working - sticking to one recipe and just tweaking things step by step rather than going for a completely different method that's worked for someone else. Loaf 6250g white flour, 250g wholegrain wheat flour.80% hydration15% starter2% salt Starter: I used it straight from the fridge, but I'd fed it a couple of days before with white flour instead of wholemeal. Maybe that made a difference? In the morning, did 1 hour autolyse, then mixed in starter & salt. 4 stretch & folds over 2 hours, then a bulk ferment at room temp for about 5-6 hours with another stretch and fold in between. No pre-shape. Proofed in a glass bowl, covered with a plastic bag, overnight in fridge for about 16 hours. Slashed the top which was difficult due to crap knife and very sticky dough. Baked in dutch oven at ~230c for 20 mins covered, 30 mins uncovered. Let cool for 1 hour. Result: Really nice, EVEN crumb without the heaviness/density of previous attempts. This must be because of a longer proof in the fridge, and possibly the activity of sourdough starter. The sides look kind of ugly because of the baking paper I use. My makeshift dutch oven is a little too small so it causes creases in the sides.
I made my first Emmer flour bread yesterday and visually it came out great. But...the bottom was over done and somewhat burnt. The look, feel and taste on the bottom resembles an over proofed sourdough. Like there was too much sugar as the result of the yeast “over eating”. i used a sourdough starter and kept to the times stated in the recipe. Along the way the dough reacted like any other low gluten dough I have made (mainly Einkorn). It rose a little, was “pillowy” after both the bulk and final rise in the fridge. Again, I followed all of the instructions. Or at least I think I I did. Are there any other hidden tips for baking with Emmer flour? I love the taste and the feel of the crumb. Thanks!
This bread was made with an augmented set of tools.  My main set of digital scales were gifted and so I pulled out a set of weights and a balance scale and did my best to measure by those means.  With my limited weight set I simply based everything off a total flour weight of 1 kilogram to make percentages and measurements simple. This formula made two pretty large oblong loaves. The total formula was pretty simple Flour (KA Bread Flour) -  85% - 850 Grams Whole Wheat Flour - 10% - 100 Grams Spelt Flour - 5% - 50 Grams Water - 85 % - 850 Grams Salt - 2% - 20 Grams Asiago (small cubes) - 15% - 150 Grams Fresh cracked black pepper - unknown quantity One head of garlic roasted 10% of the bread flour was prefermented in a liquid levain that was fed approximately 4 hours before beginning the autolyse.  The autolyse then consisted of 750 grams Bread Flour, 100 Grams Whole Wheat Flour, and 50 Grams of Spelt flour mixed with 700 grams of fairly warm warm water to combat the winter cold.  This was mixed by hand until all of the flour was hydrated and then left to rest for 30 minutes.  The levain was then mixed in with autolyse followed by the salt along with the last 50 grams of water.  I mixed by hand for a few minutes until I was happy with the development that had been achieved.  This was left to rest for 20 minutes followed by a fold; after another 20 minute rest period I spread water on my work bench and stretched my dough thin on my work surface.  At this point I distributed the asiago, garlic and black pepper and then folded the dough back into a boule.  After another 20 minute rest period I repeated the "lamination" process again.  This was followed by an hour of fermentation, a gentle fold and then another hour and a half of fermentation. Once the bulk fermentation was finished I transferred the dough to my work surface and divided it into two even pieces and rounded them gently using my bench knife as a hand.  After allowing them to relax for 20 minutes or so I used a stitching method to shape the loaves and put them into baskets with a little bit of rice flour to prevent sticking. I allowed the loaves to proof for 1 hour before putting them in the fridge for what ended up being about 14 hours. They were baked in a cloche at 500 degrees for 20 minutes with the lid on and 20 minutes with the lid off with some rotating to avoid oven hot spots.
and I made a big fat sesame semolina long batard @1000g, and placed a full sized apple in the photo for size comparison. And a tray of Cinnamon Buns, alfanso style.  These are made with laminated croissant dough, and I haven't been able to locate elsewhere where such dough is used for these buns.  Therefore these are alfanso style. If you look carefully, you can see the laminations And whilst visiting the Old Spanish Monastery today I happened across my namesake, so for the first time since signing on to TFL I've decided to change my avatar.
The link below is a video of the full restoration from stripping it down, respraying, repairing and rebuilding. Thank you to everyone that has posted information on the Hobart N50, without this I would not have been able to restore my Hobart so successfully https://youtu.be/mnA2IbFm4bc thank you Philip
i have been trying to make this type of croissant please help with ideas
Wanted to really get serious about baking, so followed perfect loaf's weekday sourdough recipe (https://www.theperfectloaf.com/simple-weekday-sourdough-bread/). Here are the results!! Very very satisfied :) '
While I have Ken Forkish's Flour, Water, Salt, Yeast, I don’t often bake from it. I'll admit to being put off by some of his notions but that doesn’t mean I should deprive myself of good bread.  So, I decided to have another look when I needed to bake a couple of weekends ago. After poring through the recipes, I settled on the Overnight Country Brown.  It was appetizing and I had the time to devote to it.  But, before launching, I had a very thorough read to see what Mr. Forkish says about temperatures.  After seeing repeated mentions of room temperature, I found his definition buried deep in a discussion about desired dough temperature.  According to Mr. Forkish, room temperature is 71F.  That explains why there are so many frustrated FWSY bakers, most of whom probably expect room temperature to be in the mid-70s. Since my kitchen temperature during Kansas winters is typically in the 67-69F range, I felt I had a decent shot at using the formula's timings without over-fermenting the dough. My first departure from the formula was to make 250g of levain, not the full kilogram that Ken calls for.  The final dough only requires 218g.  Remember me mentioning that some of his notions are rather off-putting?  Making and discarding massively excessive quantities of levain is one of those. The levain was eventually ready a little after 5:00, so that was when I assembled the final dough; almost exactly as instructed.  The deviations were an additional 50g each of freshly milled barley and rye flour, along with 50g of flax meal; hence the “+” in the title of the post.  I backed down the amount of bread flour by an equivalent amount to keep the hydration in balance. After mixing in the salt, the dough was treated to four or five minutes of slap and folds until I could see that the gluten was moderately developed.  It was rested for 30 minutes and then given a round of stretch and folds in the bowl.  After three additional rounds of stretch and folds, each at 30-minute intervals, the dough had plenty of body even though it was still quite sticky. The dough was left to ferment for 15 hours.  At the end of bulk fermentation, the dough was absolutely beautiful.  It was 2.5 to 3 times its original volume, silky, and still sticky. I elected to divide the dough into two loaves.  Each was shaped into a tight boule and deposited, seam side down, into bannetons that were liberally coated with rice flour. While the loaves fermented (slowly), I prepped the oven for baking by placing a baking stone on the center shelf and a steam pan on the lower shelf.  While I salute those who use Dutch ovens, I am more comfortable working without them.  Based on what came out of the oven, my final deviation from Mr. Forkish's instructions was quite successful.  The seams opened up to allow plenty of oven spring.  There was some fissuring along the sides of the loaves but not enough to cause problems.  While the loaves felt light for their size, the crumb was only moderately open and fairly even in texture.  This might be the result of the slap and folds after the initial mix.  In any event, the crumb was perfect for the bread's intended purpose: sandwiches.  It also worked well as toast. The bread's flavor was outstanding.  Lots of roasted nuts and caramel notes from the crust, with the crumb contributing a creamy blend of grains and mild acidity.  It was thoroughly enjoyable. This is definitely worth a repeat, although it may be more of a challenge when things move faster in warmer temperatures.  Paul
This is a redo of arecipe from last October with a few changes; I used spelt flour and cranberries this time as well as ale for part of the liquid. Sleeping Giant Brewery is local and this particular ale won gold at the 2013 Canadian  Brewing Awards. Recipe Makes 3 loaves 700 g strong bakers unbleached flour 300 g freshly milled Spelt (300 g Spelt berries) 465 g filtered water 235 g Sleeping Giant Brewery Beaver Duck Ale 30 g yogurt 22 g salt 200 g spent beer malted grains (Sleeping Giant Brewery) 200 g cranberries 250 g of 3 stage 100% hydration levain (procedure below) Wholegrain flour as well as unbleached flour to feed the levain Two mornings before: 1. Take 2 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 4 g of filtered water and 4 g of wholegrain flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: 1. Feed the levain 20 g of water and 20 g of wholegrain flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: 1. Feed the levain 100 g of filtered water and 50 g of wholegrain flour as well as 50g of strong baker’s flour. Let rise until doubled (about 6 hours). 2. Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: 1. Mill the Spelt berries on the finest setting of your mill or measure out ready bought whole grain Spelt flour if you don’t mill your own. 2. Place the required amount of the Spelt flour in a tub and add the unbleached flour to it. 3. Cover and set aside. 4. Measure the spent grains and cranberries. Mix together and refrigerate. Dough making day: 1. When ready to make the dough, take the spent grains/cranberry mixture and the levain out of the fridge to warm up before being used in the dough. 2. Using a stand mixer, mix the water with the flours, and mix on speed 1 until all the flour has been hydrated. Let this autolyse for a couple of hours. 3. Once the autolyse is done, add the salt, the yogurt, and the levain to the bowl. Mix on speed one for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on speed 2 for 9 minutes. 4. Add the spent grains and cranberries to the mixing bowl, and mix on speed 2 until they are evenly distributed. This will take a couple of minutes. 5. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). 6. Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds (coil folds) at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise to about 30%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and  bubbles on top as well. This particular dough rose quite quickly and was ready 45 minutes after the last coil fold. 7. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~800 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. 8. Do a final shape by flouring the top of the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make a nice tight boule. 9. Sprinkle a  mix of rice and all purpose flour in the bannetons. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Baking Day 1. The next morning, heat the oven to 475F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. 2. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. Tada! 😊
I had made a tasty carrot bread with spices before and wanted to do the same, but this time I thought I'd make two separate doughs and laminate them together. I did one white dough autolysed with carrot juice and a mostly whole grain dough autolysed with water.  After autolyse, I added about 100g of shredded carrot to the carrot dough. I added cumin/chipotle powder/coriander to one loaf during lamination and I added raisins and toasted walnuts to the other. These loaves didn't look like much after the bake and I was disappointed, but I'm very happy with the crumb and taste. I think this is one of the better breads I've made given that it's about 40% whole grain. The crumb is extremely soft! 20% starter (or 10% pre-fermented flour) Started hydration at 80% and added a bit of water along the way
I have recently become obsessed with making taller, fluffier pancakes. I didn't used to see the point of pancakes, but it is such a good way of using up sourdough discard and making the mornings more relaxing. So far, I have tried several 'best fluffy pancakes' recipes, and made several by eye. Things I have noticed: So, my attempts have led to some improvement, but I still haven't accomplished my goal! No matter how tall and fluffy my pancake batter is, once I flip it, it always deflates. I have tried using a lower temperature and letting the surface 'set' so it gets a matte appearance before flipping, but to no avail. They simply start falling before I flip. I've also tried making them with very small or very large diameters, and stacking extra batter on top after they start to set, but neither seems to make any difference. Do you agree with my observations, or do you think I have no tastebuds? Any advice on taller, fluffier, silkier pancakes? Can you diagnose any problems based on my picture? My most recent recipe:
Soft White Sourdough Bread
This didn't turn out as good as the last one, even though I used almost the same process. Differences: - Starter refreshed night before (as opposed to a few days before)- Slightly shorter final proof (~2 hrs)- Didn't use as much baking paper - this may have contributed to less rise Loaf 6250g white flour, 250g wholegrain wheat flour.80% hydration15% starter2% salt Starter: Refreshed it with stoneground white flour the night before. In the morning, did 1 hour autolyse, then mixed in starter & salt. 5 stretch & folds over 2 hours, then a bulk ferment at room temp for about 6-7 hours. No pre-shape. Shaped into a round, then, proofed in a glass bowl, covered with a plastic bag, overnight in fridge for about 12 hours. When flipped over, the topside of the dough was sticky and had lost its shape. It made it difficult to slash. I wonder whether I should do a quick 'tuck under' shaping before the next bake to increase tension. Rather than using baking paper all over, I just used it to drop it into the dutch oven, but this meant that the dough lost its shape and didn't rise as much in the oven. I think this d. oven is a bit small. Baked in dutch oven at ~230c for 20 mins covered, 30 mins uncovered. Let cool for a day, then re-heated before cutting open. Result: A decent crumb, though felt a little dry (maybe because I waited a day?) Still better than attempts before number 6, but not as good as number 6.
Hi, for this bake I decided to completely change up my process. I did this in part to fit my schedule, since I decided to make the dough late at night on a Friday, and in part to try a longer bulk ferment and baking the loaf straight from the fridge. Oven spring wasn't as strong as in my other bakes, but it might've been due to 1. a sleepy starter, 2. an overly long bulk ferment, 3. shaping and proofing in a bowl as boule, instead of making a long batard. Ingredients 240 g KAF AP flour30 g KAF WW flour30 g Arrowhead Rye flour200 g water 6 g salt (1.5% salt, lowered to adjust for salinity from olives)0.5 g IDY (roughly a pinch, to make up for the slow starter)70 g starter (fed 8 hours prior with 3:1:4 AP:WW:water)Soaker 10 g oatmeal10 g flax10 g bran26 g hot water (78% total hydration)Levain build 50 g starter (100% hydration, fed 1:1 starter to feed 8 hours ago)10 g WW flour10 g Rye flour20 g water Steps1. Feed starter, autolyse flour and water, autolyse for 1 hr2. Fold in starter, salt, and soaker, rest for 15 minutes3. 100 french folds4. 5 sets of S&F in 30-minute intervals 5. Bulk ferment for 5 hours at 66˚F (I decided to go to sleep, this was 1am- 6am)6. Shape then proof for another 40 minutes7. Cold ferment for 10 hours8. Preheat DO and oven to 500 F, line bottom of DO with foil, leaving one corner folded up9. Score and load loaf with floured baking paper straight from the fridge10. Slip 3 cubes of ice into DO, ideally under the folded-up corner of foil11. Bake at 475 F, covered, for 25 mins12. Bake at 425 F with convection, uncovered, for another 20 mins
Getting into the rhythm of making breads Monday, Wednesday, Friday. Slowly & surely making progress. To answer “why a bread machine”, have a choice between that & a toaster oven. No stove, no range, no oven... yet; long story. Today’s “Arts & Sciences” project is the GF Sourdough English Muffin Loaf. Been playing with different measures of flours & liquids in very small batches. Only enough to make two or three muffins. Muffins have been tasty; made on an electric crepe skillet. Knew that’d come in handy one day, HaHa. We ate them before I even thought to take pix. Bread takes longer to cool *wink*. Prime photo shoot subject.
Two large (kilo) loaves baking I milled and sifted a little over a kilo of high extraction flour (containing some sprouted and dried grain). I put a ~200 gm of starter in the kettle of the stand mixer, and added a good splash of water and mixed until a smooth batter and let ferment a few hours. I added another splash of water, and some flour to make a thick batter and let it ferment a few hours. in the evening, I added the rest of my flour, 22 grams of salt, and some water. I mixed to make a shaggy dough. As the dough absorbed water, I added more water and mixed some more, until I had a smooth dough about the consistency of baguette dough. I let it ferment a couple of hours on the counter, and then put it in the fridge overnight. In the morning, I put it back on the counter for a few hours.I divided into loves and shaped the loaves. I let the loaves proof on the counter for 4 hours, then baked on stone at 400F convection.
These notes reflect a learning curve that began as a chef’s apprentice in 1979. By 2005 during a less glorious career phase I had reached a temporary stopping point, so I began a compilation of my Chef’s notes as a distraction. Originally intended as a gift for my first-born son which I hoped would put the baker's fire in him, it took initial form as a short and sweet how-to guide with an accompanying formula calculating tool, and a jar of sourdough culture. I’ve been reading and studying baking, and adding notes ever since. The original very modest formula calculator has undergone fifteen updates, each one elaborating and refining the design, as well as functions and practical applications. I intend to post it in the near future, along with a quick start guide, plus a much more detailed guide for more advanced bakers. By the time this project began, my son was 22. He had trained in my kitchens, wetting his feet at age nine, and growing up surrounded by talented cooks. His interest and skills developed year on year. He learned about cooking, and kitchens, and the people who inhabit kitchens just as I had done; from scratch. I was a graduate philosophy student, bike mechanic, and house painter, but in a professional kitchen, a know-nothing. I didn’t even know how to hold a chef’s knife when I talked a local chef into accepting me as apprentice. That was a long time ago. Since then, I’ve been mentor to dozens like me. I believe I’m qualified to do a few more. What has become of that little project is The Unabaker Speaks. Meditations upon a life spent in kitchens, gastronomical commentary, artisan baking adventures in a very hot climate, philosophical discussion, occasional dialogue, a bit of storytelling, and an argument for baking as a binding principle for well-being. The first few chapters that follow deal specifically with understanding baking as a process phenomenon, and baker’s ingredients by a discussion of their material properties. Though aimed at cooks and bakers with an adequate knowledge base and some experience, ardent home bakers might also find it interesting and useful, perhaps even entertaining. For novice bakers and cooks, I’ll soon return to writing the “all you really need to know right now” beginners start-up guide, but if read carefully, these notes make for a good, though technically detailed introduction. If they’ve some facility with chemistry, even novices will get it, and very likely, quicker than I did. Baking is a meditative activity on the one hand, and on the other, much akin to performing lab experiments. It fosters well-being, methodological precision, and intellectual development. The Unabaker believes that more people baking more, and baking smarter is better for the world. Philosophical, analytical, curious, often humorous, and because he's experienced, old and grey, occasionally he’s been confused with a know-it-all. He’s not. He has too much experience to know it all. If you happen to like this little epistle, feel encouraged by it, or even thoughtfully provoked by it, look for The Unabaker Speaks, or contact him directly. 1 What is Baking? A simple definition is: “one of a just a handful of cooking methods, baking is the application of dried heat to composite preparations that require the removal of excess moisture in order to create a stable, edible structure”. Usually this is done using some sort of enclosed insulated box or cavern with a heat source, but baking can also be done on any surface that can be heated, regardless if it’s an insulated box or not. Cooking on a heated stone is baking. A griddle, Comal, or Tawa to cook english muffins, tortillas, chapati, and flatbreads is baking. Making toast is baking. Defining such a complex thing by cataloging its rudimentary elements isn’t very illuminating though, nor do we gain much understanding of the processes involved. If you want to learn to bake, or bake better, the simple truth is, you need to know more. How much more? It's up to you. Baking is not simply about making tasty stuff by ridding things of excess moisture. It’s a complex process during which a variety of physicochemical and microbiological changes occur. It’s helpful to understand these. Because it’s so complex, you can study it as much as you want, but the more you do, the more it will seem you don't know enough. It's part of the charm of our craft. Consider then, the following excellent, though slightly technical description of the process. I lifted it from a journal written by a group of enlightened gurus.1 It’s a precise description, though perhaps an imprecise quote. “During baking, heat is transferred mainly by convection from the heating media, and by radiation from oven walls to the product surface followed by conduction to the product center. During this process, as the temperature within rises, moisture diffuses outward to the product surface, starches begin to gelatinize, forming interior structure, gases and steam cause the product to expand, the interior to develop characteristic porosity depending upon the type of baked product, and the exterior forms a crust, browning gradually as baking time increases. Eventually, the interior temperature has risen enough to cause a stable distribution of heat and moisture transport throughout the product.” This is as clear and concise as any I've ever read. Of course, being concise, it is not complete. Other things are going on. On a timeline during baking, and in sync with the processes above, as the interior temperature of the product gradually rises, enzymes act upon starches at lower temperatures (about 30ºC) breaking them into sugars, yeast dies (45-50ºC), enzymatic activity increases (at about 50-60ºC), then ceases simultaneously to the beginning of protein (gluten) interaction with starches (60-80ºC). Of course, the development of aromatic and flavor compounds accompany. All of these processes occur depending upon the rate of heat applied, amount of heat applied, oven humidity, and the period of time over which heat is applied.2 What are the differences between heat energy transfer from radiation, convection, and conduction? Radiation and convection refer to the heat energy created within the oven environment. The oven’s heat source creates convection currents of thermal energy, always flowing from hotter to cooler regions.3 Radiant energy is transferred from the interior surfaces of the oven to its center. As an oven preheats, it doesn't do so everywhere inside all at once, it does so gradually. The duration required depends upon oven dimensions, the various properties of the materials used to fabricate it, and the amount of heat energy being applied. Eventually, when all regions of the oven are more or less the same, the oven is said to have heated up. When thinking of convection it’s useful to imagine flow. Convected energy flow pertinent to cooks and bakers occurs in ovens, and in pots of liquid. We know from the Second Law of Thermodynamics that energy movement is always directed from regions of greater heat toward cooler regions, and that the rate of movement can be increased mechanically. The pot of liquid and the heat in the oven exhibit similar flow, but increasing the rate of flow has different implications for each. Some ovens have a fan that increases the rate of flow. Increasing the rate of flow speeds up the process. This is why convection ovens bake more efficiently, allowing lower temperature settings to be used. Unlike ovens, pots typically just have cooks to stir them. When a cook stirs a pot what happens? Stirring will help to equalize the diffusion of heat more rapidly in the pot of course, but it also decreases the amount of overall heat energy. Why does stirring aid one, and hinder the other? Because ovens have doors, stirred pots do not. Putting a lid on the pot will increase thermal flow, and since it also increases pressure within the pot, it increases the thermal conductivity of the material within (about which, more to come later). Nevertheless, pots occasionally still need to be stirred. A good cook tinkers with his stew as the process moves forward, tasting, adjusting and stirring periodically. Bakers aren’t so fortunate to be able to adjust a product once in the oven. There’s no baker's equivalent to the leeway cooks have. For this reason, accuracy of formulation becomes very important. Baking is a lot like executing a lab experiment. We can’t take something out half-baked, reformulate it by adding a bit more of this or that, then stick it back in, and expect success. In any case, when radiant and convected thermal energy are applied to cookie dough, conduction takes the baton. Conduction is the direct transfer of heat energy on a molecular level across a heat gradient. The baton passes molecule to molecule. “Heat gradient” means a range of temperatures throughout the medium, always hotter nearest the heat source, gradually less and less so toward the point farthest from the source. Conduction is an irreversible directional process, always going from hot to not so hot across the gradient in any material. In a preheated oven, whatever it is that we put in the oven is the cooler region, and it remains cooler than the oven, absorbing more and more heat energy until turning completely to ash. Conducted heat energy is what actually cooks your cookie dough. When the thermal energy has been distributed evenly throughout the material, it is said to have stabilized, that is, reached a point of thermal and moisture equilibrium. Radiant and convected heat energy in the oven has been transferred to the cookie dough, and then conducted throughout. Your cookie is ready. The report proceeded to details. I paraphrase perhaps, but accurately so: “During baking, the temperature and moisture distribution within the porous structure of the product can be predicted, but in order to do so, knowledge of the product properties is needed. These include density, specific heat, thermal conductivity, thermal diffusivity, and moisture diffusivity.” These five product properties interrelate. Simply put, the first three, density, specific heat, and thermal conductivity, refer to physical properties of all matter, and which affect how something bakes, and the other two, thermal and moisture diffusivity, are process phenomena, that is, things that happen during the baking process which are how it bakes. In the oven, thermal energy acts by radiation and convection, and then by conduction to create movement within the material being baked. What is it that moves? On the molecular level where this occurs, it's the individual molecules that start to agitate under the influence of the conducted heat. Conducted energy transfer occurs directly, molecule to molecule. The moisture content of the item being baked begins to move after being heated sufficiently, but it takes a lot of heat energy to motivate moisture. This is why baking is a gradual process. If instead of water, we had some other innocuous liquid with much better thermal properties, then baking would proceed more rapidly. Perhaps there’s some parallel universe where it exists. In this one, water is what we have. Baking is gradual. Bakeshop products are not piles of discreet ingredients. They are composite mixtures of ingredients. Many of the ingredients used by bakers have water content. Since the moisture in a product is part of its mass, the movement of it during the baking process is often referred to as “mass transfer”. Mass transfer has implications regarding changes to product density during baking, and of course also for heat transfer because moisture carries thermal energy from hotter to cooler regions of the product. As moisture moves, it obviously means the warmer region it moves from now has less mass, and the cooler region it moves to has greater mass. Because water also undergoes phase change from liquid to steam, it means that the total mass of the product decreases because some of the steam escapes through the surface of the item. Mass is directly related to density. Given the same volume of a substance the one with less mass (weighs less) is less dense. Less dense is generally preferred by humans. Fortunately for them, baking fosters this. Heat and moisture move through a substance gradually. Gradual movement through a medium is called diffusion. Thermal energy and moisture diffuse across the temperature gradient of the product. As it does, various interesting transformations take place along the way. Starches gelatinize to form structure, trapping a fraction of the moisture within. Water undergoes phase change, meaning it turns to steam, and together with CO2 created by any leavening agents used, helps to create expansion; volume increases. Porous interior structure forms as a result of both starch gelatinization and expansion. Crust forms on the exterior, and gradually browns. When the interior temperature has risen sufficiently, there’s a stable distribution of heat and moisture throughout. The baking process has reached its ideal conclusion. Any continued application of heat beyond this point reduces moisture content, which is not ideal for deliciousness, or textural delight. Humans enjoy both of these qualities quite a bit. Bakers go to work every day aiming to provide enjoyment. Bake shop formulations whether cake, pie, bread or custard have their own set of unique values for each of these properties and processes. What follows is a short tutorial. 1 Modeling of Simultaneous Heat and Water Transport in the Baking Process,  S.S. Sablani, M. Marcotte, O.D. Baik and F. Castaigne, LWT - Food Science and Technology, Volume 31 (3) - April, 1998 2 The information in this paragraph, and some of the wording was found in a very useful website, Bread and the Technology of Bread Production, Noël Haegens, www.classofoods.com 3 That heat energy always moves from areas of greater concentration to areas of lower concentration is explained by the idea of Entropy, which can be stated in simplistic terms as “ordered systems tend toward disorder”. The Second Law of Thermodynamics states that entropy never decreases over time, and reaches its maximum state at a point of thermal equilibrium. That heat flows to colder bodies, and never the reverse is an empirical finding; axiomatic in thermodynamic theory. Baking is not a perfect example of this since Entropy applies to closed systems of which sort, baking is not. 2 Density What is density? Density is an intrinsic property of matter that expresses a relationship between the mass of a substance, and a volume measure of it. “Intrinsic" means that it's a feature of a substance by virtue of the chemical composition and molecular structure of the substance. It is part of what a thing is, and cannot be removed from the thing. Density of a substance doesn't depend upon how much of it we have. No matter how much we have, or what geometric configuration it takes, it has the same density. A bucket of water has the same density as a bag, beaker, or box of it because the chemical composition and molecular structure of water don’t change unless some force acts upon it. A change in temperature, or the amount of pressure being applied are such forces that can alter the density of any material. For this reason, charts of densities for common substances reference a range of temperatures, and a specific amount of pressure at which the stated density value is true. Temperature and pressure matter, but a beaker full, or enough to fill your momma’s handbag does not. How is density calculated? Density is the ratio of a unit of mass of a substance to a unit volume of it. In other words if I have a thimble, or a coffee cup, or the boot space of my old MGB, either of these would be the unit of volume, and then whatever the unit of weight we prefer to use (typically gram units) would be its unit of mass. Calculating density is easy. The density of a substance is the weight of it required to fill whatever volume measuring tool is used, and expressed as a ratio of weight per unit of volume. The formula for calculating the density of water, or any other substance is quite straightforward. It can be derived by dividing a unit mass of a substance (weight), by a unit volume of it. Density = Mass ÷ Volume. For example it takes 1 gram of water to fill a cubic centimeter measuring tool. Density is always expressed as weight per unit of volume. Therefore, the density of water is one gram per cubic centimeter (1 gram/cc3), sometimes expressed as 1 kilogram per liter (1kg/l). If we wanted to compare the density of another substance to that of water, we would use the same measuring tool, and then just weigh how much of the other substance it takes to fill it. If it requires more than 1 gram to fill the cubic centimeter, then its density would be greater than 1, and if less is required, it's density would be a fraction of 1. For example, even though milk is mostly water, it also includes a fraction of fat and milk solids, both of which are less dense than water. Thus, milk is less dense than water. Milk is .610grams/cc3. Here are some other common bakeshop ingredients including coffee because it's so commonly applied to bakers. Coffee is .330gram/cc3; sugar is .880; most fats are .900 to .950; flour varies depending on what type of grain and how much of the whole grain remains after milling, but for wheat flour it's around .593. Salt is an example of a baker's ingredient with greater density than water. It's about 2.17grams/cc3. Differences in the molecular structure of substances make a difference. Is the object solid, liquid or gas? Has it any interior void space, like wood or styrofoam? Is the item granular, like flour or seeds? Is it a composite material with various types of stuff as part of its makeup, like metal alloys and people? Objects with void space (air pockets) are less dense than if some of the void space is eliminated by compaction. What if void space is added? All items expand during baking, meaning that void space has increased. Consequently, the density of a baked item decreases as baking proceeds because it has expanded in volume. The fact that the density of baked items falls during the process has direct implications for thermal conductivity, and for heat and moisture transfer. Heat and moisture transfer is fundamentally what the baking process is all about. We don't normally think of ourselves as airy (though our colleagues might), but human bodies have lots of empty space between organs, and they have lungs functionally equivalent to personal floatation devices, plus we have unavoidable quantities of intestinal airiness. Calculating the density of water is easy, but the density of composites such as baked items, and for such odd substances as The Unabaker isn't as clear, but we can figure it out. Unabaker's density is related to his length, girth, weight, ratio of fat, muscle and bone, lung capacity, void space between organs, and volume of intestinal air. Careful calculations would likely show that the density of the The Unabaker is about 1.03 gram per cubic centimeter, which means he is slightly more dense than water. It's not a big difference unless he's a bad swimmer (he is). He might sink or float depending upon the water type, salt (he’ll float), or freshwater (he will not), and if he is inhaling (floats), or exhaling (sinks). We know that things with density lower than water tend to float. By inhaling mightily he might lower his density to below 1, in which case he floats even in freshwater. Is it surprising that things like bowling balls float? Actually, only some do. Bowling balls are manufactured to a specific dimension no matter the weight of it, so it makes sense that lighter bowling balls must have more void space than heavier ones. As a result, just like people, some float, others do not. For bakeshop purposes, mass can be more practically understood as weight. What unit of volume measure we choose for the calculation makes no difference. We can do what most folks do, and use a graduated beaker, or we might use a shoe, a goblet, a great big box, or the trunk (boot) space of my old MGB. It will obviously require different weights of the substance to fill each of these, but as the unit of measure changes, the weight required to fill it changes. It doesn't change the density of the substance. Density of the substance that’s loaded into my sports car’s trunk, or your shoe does not change. Even though the weight of a substance is a more practical basis for calculating density, and bakers own scales, they almost never do such things. As bakers, we don’t need to know precise values for individual ingredient density. We need only a general understanding of how they compare, one to the other. For example, most people know that a cup of water weighs more than a cup of flour, but do you know if water weighs more than sugar, and if you know which one weighs more, does it always follow that the heavier one is more dense? Yes, it does. For powdered, or granulated items, does it matter how fine it’s been ground? Is all purpose flour more dense than whole wheat flour? Perhaps you know, but do you know why? What about rye flour? Does it matter if it’s dark rye or light rye? How about vegetable oil? Oil seems like it ought to be heavier than water because it’s more viscous. It seems heavier, but of course, it’s not. Defying common sense again, vinegar seems like it ought to be the same as water, but in fact, it's not. Water is more dense than oil, therefore oil floats on water. Vinegar is more dense than water. Will water float on vinegar? What about butter? Butter is very much like oil in some respects, I mean, they’re both forms of fat. Does this mean butter is less dense than water? Yes, it does. Knowing some of the characteristics of basic materials can allow us to deduce characteristics of others. Fat is less dense than water. Knowing this we can expect that suet, lard, butter, margarine, schmaltz, and vegetable oil are less dense than water. Water is more dense than flour, and flour weighs more than an equivalent measure of bran. We know water is more dense than flour, but so are eggs, sugar, salt, and even some types of starch. Why do we care about the density of flour, oil, sugar, salt or water? Density has direct implications for other properties of bakeshop formulations, and for the baking process, as well as activities that precede it. Proper measurement of ingredients is an important one of those activities. We noted that two things affect density of a material. Temperature is one of those. Water has a density of one gram per cubic centimeter (1g/cc3), but it’s valid only for water at 4ºC (about refrigerator temp). As water temperature rises, density falls. Because no one owns cubic centimeter spoons, density of water is also expressed as one gram per milli-liter (1g/ml), or one kilogram per liter (1kg/l). We only need to select the most convenient method of measuring volume. For example, we put milk into a beaker, but tug boats into water. For big stuff, or oddly configured objects, the volume of an item is more conveniently gauged by its displacement of water. Some items make sense to measure one way, and some make sense to measure another. All we have to do is be consistent, and report the density of the material accordingly; grams of cobweb per metric bowling shoe, per US Standard handbag, or per big old box; it does not matter. Since, shoes, handbags and big old boxes all vary, and none are particularly convenient to use, normally you’ll find density reported as grams/cc3, or kg/liter. I’m unsure if the density of cobweb is known, or if different cobweb have different densities, but I’ll bet there’s an Arachnologist who does. In some parts of the world people likely wonder how to convert the density of water if using quaint things like teaspoons. How many cubic centimeters of water is required to fill a US standard teaspoon? It turns out to be a tad more than 4.9289 cubic centimeters per teaspoon, which means there’s about 4.9289 grams per teaspoonful of water, or about 236.587 grams per US Standard cup.1 If you know that table salt is about 288 grams per cup, you also know that salt is quite a bit more dense than water. Can you guess how much flour it takes to fill a cup? The correct answer is: it takes a different amount every time you fill it. That’s one of the problems with measuring flour by volume. Volume measurements always vary because some days are more humid than others. Flour absorbs humidity. Volume measurements also vary because flour can be compacted. It's granular, therefore has void spaces between. How is density relevant to the actual baking process? Density directly affects the thermal properties of items during the baking process. Each type of product has a different thermal profile that we use to predict the baking process. Density affects that profile. A discussion of those properties comprise the subjects of upcoming sections. The density of an item being baked changes during the process as temperature is applied continuously over time. Products lose moisture when baked, and also expand. Losing moisture means it has lost weight, and expanding means it has greater volume. Doing either alters density. Doing both, alters it more. Baking causes a double whammy decrease, though it does so to the delight of consumers of bread. The density of a baked bread loaf is about 41-45% that of the unbaked bread dough. Density is an important relevant factor that affects most of the other properties (except specific heat) of an item being baked, and it's something that baker’s deliberately tinker with from formulation to finished product. Depending on the amount of water used, you’ve got bagel, baguette, or ciabatta; english muffin, pancake, or crêpe. Does this mean that density is not an intrinsic property? We said density doesn't change. That’s true unless there’s a temperature or pressure change. Density is an intrinsic property of matter, but it’s not a constant value. “Tall” is an intrinsic property of the concept skyscraper, but its degree of tallness changes if certain things occur. Instead of temperature and pressure that affect density, adding another floor can cause tallness to change. It is still the substance known as skyscraper, only its tallness has changed. Density is an echo of a material's structure and composition, but the echo can be faint or strong. Baking can be regarded as a controlled drying out process. Many common baking ingredients such as eggs, butter, milk, yogurt, and fruit have varying degrees of water content. Whole eggs are about 65% water. Egg whites and milk are similar, about 88% water, and butter is about 15%. Though necessary to make a proper cake, when it comes to the baking process, the total amount of water in the batter is considered to be excess. Baking gets rid of the excess. While most of the water remains trapped within the baked matrix (gelatinized starch and gluten network), some of it evaporates away as it changes to steam. How much depends upon whether or not it’s baked in a mold, and the geometric configuration of the item. A product that’s baked in a mold loses less by evaporation than one that's free-baked because it has less exposed surface area. A long narrow loaf such as baguette will have more evaporative loss than a boule because a baguette has more surface area exposed. More surface area exposed to heat means there’s more crust formation. Crust is very much drier stuff than the interior crumb of a bread loaf, and it's the moisture lost due to crust formation that accounts for most of the loss. What is it that bakers do? Bakers strive to create a balance of residual moisture by applying the right amount of heat for the right amount of time. How does temperature change affect the density of an object? Suppose I have a big old box of cobweb at 4ºC, with density of X kilograms per big old box, and I gradually increase the temperature of the cobweb over a specified timeline by 10º, 20º, 30º and 40º. The Arachnologist's chart of cobweb density will show a gradually decreasing value for density at each stage of temperature increase. The same thing happens for all materials including water, flour, butter, eggs, salt, and sugar, and for all composite formulations of these. Density of a material falls as temperatures rise, but the rate of decrease isn't proportional. The decrease is continuous, but not steady. It decreases in smaller increments at each stage of temperature increase. Why does it do so? Because as the baking process continues, there’s less moisture to lose, and there’s a limit to the amount of expansion that occurs. Doesn't this make sense? During baking, the internal temperature of bread dough rises, but the loaf doesn't expand continuously at the same rate, nor does it lose water weight in linear fashion. It expands more, and loses water more at the onset of temperature rise, then less, and less, and less. As baking proceeds, and crust forms, it limits the amount of further moisture loss, but moisture of the crumb remains relatively constant, dropping only slightly over the duration. The geometric mass of the as yet uncooked dough shrinks, but its moisture is bound in the starch gel, and as all bread crafters know, expansion of the dough mass has limits. Most moisture is lost prior to crust formation, which happens before it browns, and most expansion will occur in the first 8-10 minutes of bake time. After being removed from the oven, more moisture is lost through the crust. This accounts for sometimes soggy crusts if baking was not carried out properly before hand, or if crust formation took place too early in the process. One might observe that cake batter is not the same thing as cake, so it stands to reason that each has a distinct density. Cake will naturally be lighter than batter because it has gained volume during baking (has more air in it), and lost moisture. We can very easily calculate the density of a specific cake batter, and do the same for the cake made from it. Does that mean that these two things are distinct entities? We can also predict changes to density that take place as it is baking, and plot these changes on a graph. As a result, specialty thinkers about stuff that happens, called Phenomenologists, might argue that the two things are in fact the same thing, but appear to be distinct due to being in different phases. Water is water, but it can be ice, liquid, steam or condensate. Batter and cake are simply phases of the same thing. Another Phenomenologist interested also in the classic philosophical Problem of Identity (especially as it applies to the identity of baked entities) might offer a counter argument to disprove the identity of batter to cake. Such an argument might be something like the following. Suppose we showed photos of a slab of bacon, a crown roast of pork ribs, a picnic ham and a platter of nice sausages to a very smart pig. While it’s doubtful that we could get useful input one way or another by asking cake if it feels identity to batter, pigs have cognitive skills, and therefore we should take their assessment to heart. After all who knows “pigness" better than pigs? Would the pig recognize the photos of pork products, and identify these as being pig, or deny it completely? In much the same way philosophers discuss problems with the concept of “Identity”. What sorts of things prove that I’m the same fellow as I was long ago? Since I’m the only one that has continuous observation of myself, it's not testable data. No one can independently confirm my self-observations, and what about when I’m unconscious? I can't even provide confirmation! The evidence is unconvincing. Problems like these proliferate in Philosophy, and its practitioners actually do stuff like wonder if that little boy in the photo is the “same” as the old man in the mirror. How does the age old problem of Identity relate to baking? The study of batter growing up to be cake, if not altogether simpler, it’s at least possible to learn some useful and verifiable specifics. Instead of quibbling Phenomenologists, we have food scientists armed with mathematical models, and computers, and diffusion equations to demonstrate the identity of batter to cake, and they’re happy to show us how it’s so. The food scientist's argument for the identity of those two things is simple: the one cannot be without the other.2 They describe batter and cake identity as a process phenomenon. They know that batter, if subjected to heat, undergoes physico-chemical changes, and that density (among such) always changes gradually along a timeline in accordance with the gradual rise of internal temperature. They can describe the process, and also predict it. On the other hand, by looking at his baby photos, who could have predicted The Unabaker? Batter and cake do not really constitute two distinct things. It’s not a change of identity, it’s merely a linguistic convention to give different stages of the same process different names. The advantage scientists have over Phenomenologists is that the entities being tested can be regularly observed by any interested party, all manner of tests can be independently performed, and the behavior of batter when heated can be predicted. None of which is true of The Unabaker. Batter when subjected to heat becomes cake. Doing so involves numerous substantial changes. Changes to a product's density is one of the more noticeable ones. Bakers do not wrestle with problems of Batterness, Cakeness or Breadness. The baking process alters both the chemistry, and the molecular structure of things. During baking, cake batter gradually loses moisture, and expands in volume. The ratio between mass and volume has fundamentally changed in both critical respects. What is it that bakers do? They alter the density of baked items very deliberately, but most of the time while never thinking that’s what they’re about. Goopy batter, becomes a light sponge texture that can be sliced. Liquid eggs and cream become silken custard. A blob of dough turns into ultralight Ciabatta. It’s just as simple as that. A good project for an aspiring food science graduate paper might be to create before and after charts for densities of typical bakeshop products, along with flow charts that detail the movement of moisture and heat. Imagine how pointless that would be as far as most baker's are concerned, yet there’s probably some practical application for this knowledge. Even if there's not, can it ever be said that there’s such a thing as excess knowledge? 3 1  Here’s another way to express the density of water: one gram = 1/29 fluid ounce, and a cubic centimeter = a little bit more than 1/3 inch in all 3 dimensions. The density of water = 1 gram per cubic centimeter, or using the conversions above, we can express water density as .0344827586206 fluid ounces per cubic approximately one-third of an inch. There are 4.9289 of these cubic thirds of inches of water per teaspoon. Is it any wonder that the metric system is favored? 2  This might possibly open the door to curious Existentialist thinkers, but I hope not. 3  The Unabaker wonders, are there persons or institutions responsible for eliminating the excess, analogous to the baker ridding pie of some of its moisture, and if so, does eliminating excess knowledge makes us more or less dense? 3 Specific Heat Every object has specific heat capacity. You, your kayak, and my bike have it. Flour, eggs, butter, milk, sugar, salt, flavorings, and water have it. Bakers use these basic ingredients to make complex composites. Composites such as pie dough, cake batter, cookies, and custard have it. What is Specific Heat? Specific Heat is another intrinsic property of matter. How does it relate to density? Specific heat of a material is not influenced whatsoever by the density of that material, but both density and specific heat are factors in determining a material's thermal properties. The specific heat capacity of a material is its ability to change temperature. What's it take to make something increase in temperature? It takes energy input, thermal energy. If it takes more energy to heat it up, it is said to have greater specific heat than if it takes less energy to heat it up. Specific heat is normally understood as the amount of thermal energy required to raise the temperature of one unit of mass of the substance by one unit of temperature. For example, let’s stipulate we want to apply enough heat to 100 grams of water, cookie, cupcake and cobweb to raise the temperature of each by 1ºC. How much heat it requires to do so would be the specific heat capacity of that material. Items with higher specific heat capacity require more energy to raise their temperature. We might then usefully compare one to the other to determine appropriate uses for each. I’m no Arachnologist, but my guess is cobweb requires less heat energy than water, and therefore has lower specific heat. Water is used abundantly by bakers, but I know of no bakeshop formula that requires cobweb, yet. Perhaps a molecular gastronomist  can create one. After all such folk like to do stuff like cook things in hay. How much different is cobweb from that? We know from the First Law of Thermodynamics that any object will remain at rest, or if it’s in motion, will maintain its current rate of motion in a straight line unless a force acts upon it to either make it move, change direction, speed up, or slow down. This feature of things is called Inertia. Inertia is not so unlike when I’m on the couch, unresponsive to routine stimuli. As long as the stimuli is typical The Unabaker remains at rest. It’s an imprecise analogy of course, because Inertia, and the laws of thermodynamics apply to particles, atoms, and the collections of atoms that we call the elements Hydrogen, Oxygen, Potassium, Iron, and Carbon for example. The sort of inertia we’re talking about in baking is Thermal Inertia which is not the same as what the First Law talks about, but it’s analogous. A silly illustration follows. Since I’m a complex collection of chemical elements, let’s imagine that laws of thermodynamics describe the behavior of The Unabaker on his couch. Something sufficiently interesting has occurred to make him sit up. This would be akin to the force necessary to change an object at rest into an object that moves. What happened to make Unabaker move? Perhaps his creditors have gathered angrily at his sidewalk, or the neighbors are at it again, or maybe there's a knock upon his door along with noises that sound like, “Open up, it's the FBI!”. Inertia informs us that unless some force acts upon an object, things go merrily along as usual. The Unabaker nods off, and his cookie dough remains at rest on the countertop until moldy. The specific heat capacity of cookie dough is something we can know. How much heat energy must be applied to cookie dough to make it become cookie is what’s called its specific heat capacity. The force required is always the application of thermal energy. The FBI is almost never involved. Here’s another silly, but practical example of why specific heat is a useful thing to know. Imagine it's a very cold day in the mountains, and The Unabaker desires to go skiing. He doesn't own a boot warmer, so he decides to warm them up in the oven. The Unabaker owns very expensive ski boots, made using high impact polycarbonate plastic, weighing 3 kilograms. What amount of thermal energy is required to warm them up by 20ºC? Unabaker wishes he had known the answer! Depending upon the exact formulation of polycarbonate from which his boots are fabricated, the answer will vary, but it’s possible to know it. Besides knowing the specific heat of boots, The Unabaker desires to know how much heat it takes to warm up tater tot, burrito, and pie. These things are possible to know as well, but to do so precisely requires all of that hoo-haw the lab folks use. Instead, bakers just rely upon known formulations, specific mixing and handling methodology, and tried-and-true time and temperature settings. Part of what food scientists do is test products to find out what is "tried and true”. When we talk about how much heat it takes to raise the temperature of a substance by 1ºC, we express it as a caloric value. What is caloric value? Caloric value is a measure of an item’s energy. In fact, it’s a measure of heat energy. Food is assigned a caloric value so consumers of food can easily assess how much of it they require to maintain stasis, i.e. remain alive, while neither expanding nor contracting. Understanding living things in terms of how efficiently they utilize energy taken from their environment has implications for Science of course (the concept of entropy in particular), but also for such things as Ethics, and even Theological inquiry. For understanding such things as the specific heat of cookie, the caloric value of the cookie and its weight are essential variables of the calculation.1 Everyone knows about calories because we all desire to find the correct amount of these required to keep us going. Since calories are just units of heat energy, our caloric intake is nothing more than the measure of additional heat energy that’s been applied to our systems. Another imprecise analogy to help visualize this occurs to Unabaker. If we desire to effect change to the substance called The Unabaker, then we can add more calories to it. Its increased girth is very akin to the temperature change effected by the addition of heat to burrito. The number of calories required to increase Unabaker girth by a specific degree is the specific heat capacity of The Unabaker. “Everything expands when subjected to heat” is an example of a true truism. We know that adding burrito, tater tot and pie to The Unabaker is adding heat energy to it. If we add more burrito than required, The Unabaker expands. Why is specific heat important for bakers? It’s important because water has a very high specific heat capacity, meaning that it takes a lot of heat to raise the temperature of water. Water has a much higher specific heat capacity than any metal. This should be obvious since we know that an aluminum pot heats up rapidly, but when we put water into it, it takes quite a bit of time to heat the water. Why? Because water requires more energy to heat up than does aluminum. It has greater specific heat capacity than aluminum. Properties such as specific heat, density, and thermal conductivity (the next topic) are not only fundamentally related, but all are very much influenced by water content. What's the most obvious implication for the baking process? We should expect a very moist medium such as cake batter to have higher specific heat than bread, and custard even higher. Why so? Because, the more water content in a formulation, the higher will be it's specific heat. Of all the baker's ingredients, water has the highest specific heat capacity. Since water is a major component of many bake shop formulae, baking takes more time than if it was not. Baking is a gradual process because, just like Unabaker, inert on his couch, it takes a lot of heat energy, and a lot of time to motivate water. The movement of heat and water during the baking process are topics for the next two meditations. The math required to calculate Specific Heat capacity is more involved than for computing density, but it’s not so complex either. The formula is C= q÷(m△T). In plain english it reads, Specific Heat = the Amount of Heat Energy Added ÷ (Mass x its Change in Temperature). Knowing it is in no way necessary to bake cookies, or to warm up boots, but it’s how scientists do stuff like analyze formulae for tater tots, and frozen burrito in order to advise The Unabaker how long he must reheat these, and at what temperature, and how much of these he requires. Where would he be without Science? 1 The Chemistry of Cookies, Stephanie Warren, https://cookiechemistry.weebly.com/ Warren creates a cookie formula, then calculates its caloric value based upon a specified portion size. A chocolate chip cookie made according to her formula, and weighing 60 grams, has 110 Calories which converts to 460,240 joules [see note below]. -After sampling the cookie temperature before and after baking, Warren derives a value for the change in temperature equal to 169.45ºC. Specific heat of any material is calculated as Specific Heat = the amount of heat added ÷ (mass x change in temperature). Known values can be inserted as follows: Specific Heat = 460,420 / (60x169.45). Solving the equation derives specific heat equal to 45.27 (joule per gramºC). -This result applies only to the cookie formula used, and would not be valid for any altered formula that changes the caloric value per 60 gram portion. [In physics and chemistry, one "small calorie" (typically denoted by the lower case c abbreviation, cal) is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of water by one degree centigrade. Joule (J) is the standard unit of energy used. It takes 4.184 Joules to do that, therefore one small calorie = 4.184 Joules. However, when talking about food calories, the definition of calorie is different. One food calorie is the amount of energy required to raise the temperature of 1 kilogram (1000 grams) of water by 1ºC. Food calories are an example of what's called a "large calorie" (using the upper case C abbreviation, Cal), also known as kilocalorie (kcal) because 1 large calorie equals 1000 small calories. Therefore, 1 Calorie (Cal, or kcal) equals 4184 Joules. In which case 110 Calories is equal to 460,240 Joules. This is the amount of added heat energy represented by the cookie in Warren's example.] 4 Thermal Conductivity Thermal conductivity is yet another intrinsic property of matter. The thermal conductivity of a material refers to its ability to conduct heat energy. All matter in the universe has thermal conductivity, including people, but for such sentient substances, testing for thermal conductivity is not considered to be an optimal activity. For that reason, precautions are generally taken to avoid this by wearing oven mitts, or using potholders. Nevertheless, it's a frequent occurrence in kitchens that accidental testing occurs. For example, on such occasions when the substance known as The Unabaker has undergone such a test, it always reacts surprised, terminating the test before accurate results can be determined. Observers have nevertheless surmised that Unabaker thermal conductivity appears to be quite good. Thermal conductivity is a measure of a substance's capacity to transfer heat energy from the warm side of the material to the cold side in a given time unit. Specifically, a material’s thermal conductivity is the rate of heat transfer through a unit thickness of the material, per unit area of it, per unit of temperature difference. For example, given an equally thick, one-meter length of aluminum, and the same of copper, both of which have a temperature gradient of 25ºC (the difference between the warm end and the cold end), the rate of energy transfer can be calculated.1 We would discover having done so that copper has greater thermal conductivity than aluminum for a number of reasons which include the fact that it has greater density than aluminum, as well as, lower specific heat capacity. We normally think of aluminum as a fine conductor of heat energy, and in the grand scheme of things it is, but would it surprise you to know that of all metals, aluminum has by comparison a rather high specific heat capacity, and therefore it conducts heat rather poorly? If that's so, why do we use it so much for cooking utensils? We use it because it's cheap, there's lots of it, it's easy to work with, meaning it's easily fashioned into various finished products, and also because it's a metal solid. Even a poor thermally conductive metal is much better than almost all other substances. We like to think of the useful features of various materials as if they are virtues, in which case, aluminum, despite its high specific heat capacity, is quite virtuous stuff. In addition to those already noted, it's also a very lightweight material. Humans appreciate this because they can easily lift aluminum pots of water, whereas an iron pot, despite the virtue of being more thermally conductive, is inconvenient, and a gold pot, although it has the virtue of quite superior thermal conductivity, is both inconvenient and expensive. Since we are busy doing other stuff than studying the thermal properties of substance, it might come as a surprise to learn that, among all substances, metals are not the very best thermal conductors. It certainly surprised me. Although very efficient, copper, for example, is only about one-fourth as efficient as diamond. Imagine making cook's pots and bread baking pans from it! If suddenly there was a diamond stew pot craze on the buying network, we would need more diamonds than this planet has, a diminished fondness for sparkly adornments, and aspiring chefs would require lots more start-up capital for their taco stands as well. Despite its extremely virtuous capacity to conduct heat energy, diamond is a morally bereft electrical conductor. So bad is it that it could well function as a very, very virtuous insulator. Imagine having diamond pots to cook your goose, and diamond gloves to wear when rigging the power supply for your new Tesla! Substances in our universe exist in what are known as phase states; solids, liquids or gases.It’s not at all uncommon for a substance to exist in all three, though not simultaneously. Water is a very simple example. Among the various phase states of substances in this particular universe, solids have the greatest degree of thermal conductivity, liquids less so, and gaseous substances the least. If you have good imagination, or perhaps read carefully the second meditation, you might already suspect why this is so. Density plays a big part. Greater density means better thermal conductivity. Solids are most dense, gases least so. Why does density matter? Because conduction is a molecule to molecule phenomenon, if the molecular structure of a material is more tightly spaced, then it's so much easier to share the thermal love. Solids have the most densely populated molecular neighborhoods, liquids much less so, and gases are, by far and away, the least neighborly of all. When you're hanging out with your scientist pals down at the pub, and conversation invariably turns to the various rates of material thermal conductivity, what sort of measurement are we talking? The measurement for the thermal conductivity of a material is always expressed using units of power, called watts, a unit of area, typically the meter, and a unit of thermal energy, typically degrees Kelvin. For example, the thermal conductivity of a material is expressed as the number of watts per meter squared, per degree kelvin, or W/m2/ºK. There are different though equivalent ways of expressing the same thing using other, but equivalent units of measure. You can find this stuff in tables. No one actually does thermal conductivity tests when they're building things like power plants, or Formula 1 engines. They just look it up. Other folks have almost always done the tests already, though perhaps not yet for ski boots. Unfortunately for food engineers, since there are so many bakery food products, with so many formulations for each, if we want to know about the properties of frozen burrito or pie, then each one, and each variety of each one must be tested. What's the difference between conduction and conductivity? Conduction is one of three methods of thermal energy transfer, the other two being radiation and convection. Conduction takes place on the molecular level, but it is not an intrinsic property of matter. Thermal conductivity, on the other hand, is an intrinsic property of matter due to the material's chemical composition and molecular construction. Conduction is what happens, conductivity is the rate of the happening. In simple terms, the rate of transfer of thermal energy is the same as the amount of heat energy transferred. The concept of the “rate” of something happening always implies a time period. Miles per hour, revolutions per minute, suckers born per second. So it is for the rate of thermal conductivity. In addition to a time unit, the calculation for determining a material's rate of thermal conductivity must also account for the geometric configuration of the material. The cross sectional shape and area of the material matters. A material's rate of thermal conductivity varies according to the thickness of the material under consideration. When reference tables give the thermal conductivity for common materials, they always refer to a unit thickness of material. Another important aspect of thermal conductivity is the direction of energy movement across a specific temperature gradient, always and irreversibly moving from the warmer side of the material to the colder side.2 Considering that thermal conductivity necessarily relates to a material’s geometry, and that it changes according to the dimensions of the material, we can see how this fundamental property of matter has direct implications for baking. Baked products are geometrical entities. When it comes to the rate at which thermal energy moves within your cupcake, cookie or cake, the exact geometrical configuration of the thing matters. How does the geometric configuration of a substance affect its capacity to conduct thermal energy? If you have a one meter long aluminum rod the diameter of which is 1cm, and apply heat at one end of the rod, aluminum will transfer the thermal energy to the opposite (cold) end of the rod more readily (faster), than if the rod is 2cm thick. During baking, since the geometry of a product undergoes change, the rate of thermal conductivity changes. What changed? The item being baked always expands during the process. The rate of thermal conductivity of an item is a function of bake time. Over time, the rate decreases, but it does not do so immediately, nor in steady fashion. I shall attempt to explain this aspect in more detail, but later. How is thermal conductivity different from the specific heat of a material? Specific heat just means how much energy is required to warm up a given mass of some material by a certain degree, whereas thermal conductivity involves the concept of energy transfer; the intrinsic capacity of a material to relay thermal energy on the molecular level, molecule to molecule. Thermal energy has the jitters. It moves. It moves from hotter regions to cooler ones. Thermal conductivity is a measure of a material's rate of heat energy transfer, but rate of transfer is different from the actual movement of energy which is a concept called thermal diffusivity. Diffusivity means ability to spread through the medium. These two properties are related however. A material's value for thermal conductivity certainly affects the rate of diffusion of thermal energy throughout the substance. Most bakers don’t actually think of baking this way, but in fact, the baking process is all about the movement, i.e. the diffusion of heat and moisture through the medium being baked. Having read about this here, you can now talk intelligently about baking as a heat and moisture transport proposition, just like the science folk down at the pub do. Tell your friends that the movement of moisture, under the influence of applied thermal energy, through more or less dense materials, that exhibit varying degrees of specific heat, depending upon ingredients used, is what the baking process is all about. If you casually add that baking is really just a controlled drying out process, they’ll probably buy you beer. Thermal conductivity is a property of all substances; the intrinsic capacity of a substance to transfer heat energy. To further illuminate the difference between specific heat and thermal conductivity, I’ll use the boot warming illustration again. Suppose that The Unabaker, instead of just popping his expensive boots into his little oven, and checking progress at various time intervals (or in his case, forgetting to do so), had wanted to know how much energy would be required to warm his 3-kilogram plastic boots to a specific degree of comfort. He wanted to know precisely, so he could set his oven accordingly, and attend to other stuff like find where he had put his gloves. In this case, knowing the specific heat of high impact polycarbonate plastic would have sufficed. He could just look it up. To understand the thermal conductivity for ski boots however, is not as easy. It requires figuring out the area of the ski boots, and also the thickness of the polycarbonate material used, and then running some tests, and by that time of course the lifts have closed. You may have already concluded that he would never have done such a thing. One of the things Unabaker is famous for is his First Law of Cognitive Dynamics, sometimes referred to as the Law of Conservation of Thinking. Among trained thinkers, it’s often casually stated as: there’s a finite number of thoughts we get; use them carefully. In this case, Unabaker was in a hurry to go ski. Immediately interested only in foot comfort on a cold morning, and trusting to dumb luck and bad habit, he didn't even bother to look up the specific heat of boots. Some materials are inefficient thermal conductors, and others are efficient. What's that mean? For any material, the less energy transferred through the medium in a given time unit, the lower is its thermal conductivity. Having lower thermal conductivity is what we mean by being less efficient; it doesn't transfer thermal energy well. Despite being a different feature of matter than thermal conductivity, the specific heat of a material nevertheless relates to it. It takes much more energy to raise the temperature of water than it does for copper, thus it has greater specific heat than does copper. A material with higher specific heat is less thermally conductive, that is, it transfers fewer watts of energy, and being less thermally conductive, we say that it’s less efficient. On the other hand, if more watts of energy are transferred, the material is a more efficient thermal conductor. Copper has a much lower specific heat than does water, and so, it’s a much more efficient thermal conductor. Water is a crappy (less efficient) thermal conductor, and because it’s so, we now have further insight into why baking is a gradual process. In short, high specific heat capacity goes hand in hand with lower thermal conductivity, and we say such things are less efficient thermal conductors. Low specific heat capacity implies higher thermal conductivity, and more efficient conduction. Water has very high specific heat, very low thermal conductivity. It’s inefficient. Because it is inefficient in this regard is not to say that water lacks virtue.3 We know that water is not a good thermal conductor compared to other materials. Nevertheless, among bakeshop materials water is much more efficient than flour, eggs, sugar, salt, oil, butter and baking powder, all of which have various rates of conductivity lower than water. One might imagine as I did that oil would be a better thermal conductor than water because it can absorb more heat, but it turns out The Unabaker was confusing it's ability to achieve a higher temperature with its ability to transfer it. Oil has poor thermal conductivity. For this reason it’s used as a coolant in many mechanical applications. In addition, proportions of fats used in bakeshop formulae are most often lower than proportions of water bearing ingredients used. In cases where fats are used in large amounts, such as pie dough, short dough, and cookie dough, it implies that the composite thermal conductivity of such preparations is lower than that for ones that use greater portions of water, such as bread dough, cake batter, custard, and pie filling. What sorts of things affect a material's thermal conductivity? Do materials have the same rate of conductivity at any temperature under all conditions? No, they do not. Materials have different rates of thermal conductivity at different temperatures, or if under more or less pressure. Increase the pressure, and you increase thermal conductivity.4 Isn’t this why pressure cookers cook your beans faster? In this respect, thermal conductivity is like density; temperature and pressure are two forces that can alter a material’s thermal conductivity. The values for thermal conductivity of materials can be found in tables that always reference a range of temperatures at a specific pressure. Change the temperature or the amount of pressure applied, and the material's rate of thermal conductivity changes. Do you see the connection with material density? If a material’s density decreases, thermal conductivity is slightly less. If it has greater density, it will have greater thermal conductivity. During the baking process, items become less dense because they expand (geometry changes) and lose moisture, which is to say, they lose weight. Baked items become larger and lighter during the process. Larger and lighter necessarily means less dense, and less dense means less thermally conductive. At what temperature are materials more conductive, and when are they less conductive? It depends upon the material. Metal solids are generally more efficient thermal conductors at lower temperatures. Non-metal solids such as wood behave differently from metal solids. Liquids become less thermally conductive as temperatures rise, except for water. Water is an exceptional material! Water displays increased thermal conductivity as it heats up. Gaseous substances also have increased thermal conductivity when heated, but these are the least efficient thermal conductors, so the rise in conductivity when heated doesn't make them significantly more efficient. Baked products are not metal or wood, nor are they water balloons. Baked products are composite formulations of a bunch of different ingredients, each of which possesses its own intrinsic value for thermal conductivity. Therefore, the composite thermal conductivity for a bakery product after mixing (but prior to baking) should represent some balance of all. The baking process does interesting things to these composites however. For baked products there are three important considerations that affect thermal conductivity: temperature, moisture content, and density. Water, and water bearing ingredients such as egg, yogurt, cream, milk, and butter are important ingredients in the bake shop. Water is less efficient at conducting thermal energy at low temperatures. It is least efficient at just above the freezing point, but it becomes increasingly more efficient as its temperature rises to just below the boiling point. After reaching the boiling point, it undergoes what's called phase change, it changes from liquid to gas. Steam is gas. At this point, thermal conductivity of water is an entirely different story, but it’s one which I'm happy to tell. Let’s visualize this. A pan of cake batter undergoes continuous temperature change during baking, as the internal temperature rises to 100ºC. When put in the oven an item is typically at room temperature. As baking proceeds, the internal temperature rises, and the product’s thermal conductivity theoretically increases because it has quite a bit of moisture content, and in fact it does rise up to a point, but then it drops long before it's internal temperature can reach 100ºC. Why is this? Despite the moisture content, other ingredients in the mixture aren't simple bystanders. Significantly, most bakery products include starch and protein; flour, pure starch, eggs, milk, and whey for example. At about 60ºC starches begin to gel, and soon afterwards proteins coagulate. Both of these developments affect thermal conductivity. The thermal conductivity of a baker's composite mixture decreases after about 60ºC.5  Because it's conductivity decreases, so does the thermal diffusivity of the item, that is, the rate at which it moves heat energy through the medium. From our meditations on density we know that expansion and moisture loss cause a material's density to decrease, which, for baked goods is a much desired outcome. We know that lower product density implies lower thermal conductivity and diffusivity, and it does so because the molecular structure of the item is more spread out. Conductivity is a molecule to molecule phenomenon. While it's certainly true that water becomes more thermally conductive as temperatures rise, such stuff as starch gelatinization, protein coagulation, product expansion, and moisture loss all get a say-so in how things get done in your cupcake. We cannot simply extrapolate that bakery items will resemble the thermal behavior of water when heated.6 Water will continue to increase in thermal conductivity up to 100ºC, but bakery items are not purely a function of their moisture content. Any bakery item whose formulation includes starch or protein will demonstrate lower thermal conductivity at above 60ºC. Can you think of any baker's formula, other than for making sugar syrup that does not include starch or protein? There is another important process phenomenon that occurs to complicate simple description. Even should these structural changes not impeded thermal conductivity, water would not continue to display an ever increasing rate of thermal conductivity. When internal temperatures rise sufficiently, water undergoes phase change, that is, liquid water turns gaseous; it turns to steam. When water vaporizes, guess what happens? The thermal conductivity of water plummets. This seems counterintuitive on the one hand, and just plain odd on the other. Wouldn’t something that’s hotter necessarily share that energy better? I mean, steam is hotter than water, right? Well, actually no, it is not. Steam is 100ºC, as is liquid water at its hottest. So, how on earth does The Unabaker ever get his burrito baked if it no longer has much conductive oomph, and why does baking nevertheless proceed increasingly more rapidly at this point? If conductivity plummets, would not baking become ever so tediously slow? In some other universe, perhaps baking is more instantaneous, but in this one, baking is a gradual process. The density of a baked product decreases during the process because water content is continually being lost, interior structure starts to form, porosity develops, and the thing simultaneously expands. As it expands, the material’s molecular structure spreads out. Consequently, it takes longer to transfer energy molecule to molecule. Does the increased thermal conductivity from the rise in water temperature cancel out the decreased thermal conductivity due to lower density as baking progresses? If expansion was prevented somehow, would composite thermal conductivity stabilize, or perhaps increase? What compensates for the dramatic downfall of the thermal conductivity of water at phase change? In fact, preventing expansion does matter, and it's an interesting topic for a follow-up article, and yes, the rise in temperature implies an increased thermal conductivity for products with higher water content, but phase change has a dramatic effect upon the process, albeit in surprising fashion. There’s something else afoot during the phase change of liquid water to steam that allows the process to carry on. Phase change is another really cool feature of water, but one which is so commonplace that we are almost immune to admiring such near magic as vaporization. What is it about water that makes it even less efficient at conducting thermal energy at the boiling point, and beyond? What it is, is the fact that gaseous substances, as noted earlier, have very, very low thermal conductivity. Let’s think about it. A gaseous substance has very, very low density. This means the molecular structure of a gas is widely dispersed. Nevertheless, conduction remains a direct, one on one relay event. It becomes harder to conduct the energy. Imagine how many people a politician can shake hands with if the auditorium is vastly expanded, the exact same number of folks attend the rally, but they’re now spread out all over the room? Well, an overly earnest one can shake all the hands of course, but it would certainly be a very gradual process, and the old rascal would likely tire of trying, opting instead to just kiss babies in the front rows. Unlike aging politicians however, baking is relentless. It doesn't stop shaking molecular hands, but it does require more time and energy. What about the type of material under consideration? Bakers fabricate all kinds of different stuff with all kinds of material properties. Some quite goopy, others dense as can be. Some fatty, others lean. Some are really airy, others liquid. Some with lots of egg, others with none. Some are quite sweet, others barely so. The type of material, and its current phase state makes a big difference to thermal conductivity. Solid materials are most efficient, most thermally conductive, then liquids, then gases, and almost any material, no matter what phase it’s in (solid, liquid or gas), is more efficient at conducting thermal energy when colder…except water.7 But water, even when it heats up, is still a very poor conductor by comparison to almost any other substance, and eventually, as we now know, it gets much worse. Water vapor is gas. This is why the thermal conductivity of water at phase change plummets. What are the implications of this for bakers? For example, if The Unabaker makes a batch of baguette dough, proofs it overnight in the refrigerator, and puts it straightaway into the oven the following morning. Here are a few questions that come to mind, some rhetorical, others simply the sorts of things that Unabaker in his limited wisdom ponders: -Water has lower thermal conductivity when colder. Because Unabaker’s baguette dough is cold, will it possess lower thermal conductivity, than a similar batch of dough that’s been proofed at room temperature before baking? -Because bread has a lot of water, and water has increased thermal conductivity when it gets hotter, doesn't this imply greater thermal conductivity during the first stages of the baking process despite the chill? -Does chilled dough bake quicker than room temperature dough, the same as room temperature dough, or slower than? -The thermal conductivity of baguette dough is just one of its properties. How do density and specific heat of baguette dough come into play? -All baguette dough is not the same. Perhaps Unabaker decides to use more water to make a new batch, and again, proofs it overnight in the fridge. More water means it’s more solid, right? Which means it has greater thermal conductivity, right? But, it also means the dough is more dense because water is more dense than flour. So I wonder, is the dough more conductive because it’s more solid, or more conductive because it has greater density, or both. -On the other hand, since water has very high specific heat, this means that Unabaker’s wet baguette dough has higher specific heat than does a drier (less hydrated) dough. Higher specific heat means that it takes longer to heat it up than would a traditional baguette formula that uses less water. Isn’t “taking longer to heat up” an indication of less efficient thermal conductivity? -We also know that water becomes slightly more efficient at thermal conduction as internal temperatures rise. Does that mean wetter dough bakes  quicker? -If we consider that this baguette dough is both more wet and cold when put in the oven, what then? More wet means it either bakes up faster because it has increased thermal conductivity as the process progresses, or it means it has less thermal conductivity because it is cold, or perhaps being more wet, it's more dense, and therefore density trumps coldness. -Colder usually means it has less thermal conductivity because water is less efficient when colder. Does cold, but wet dough mean that thermal conductivity is about the same? -“Wet” implies it will take longer to heat up, and presumably longer to bake, but it also implies more thermal conductivity as it heats up, which presumably means the process should quicken as it progresses. -Does a wetter dough profit more or less from cold overnight fermentation than drier dough? -What effect on energy usage does the temperature of the dough have? Does cold dough help to conserve total energy required for baking, or does it consume more energy? -Does it always follow that denser dough has greater thermal conductivity? How does the total formulation, such as the type of flour, or fats, or eggs, or sugar effect thermal conductivity? Bread is a composite. Despite the link between water content and the various thermal properties, is it sensible to focus just on water content? -Wet dough also implies that there’s more evaporative loss during baking, which implies more steam has been created. Steam is gas. What does phase change do to the process? -Steam has a small fraction (about 3.6%) of the thermal conductivity of liquid water that has been heated to just under the boiling point.8 From one moment to the very next, conductivity face plants. How does this affect the overall heat transfer phenomenon? Are you confused? So am I.9 So let’s talk about why the baking process carries on despite all. While it is absolutely true that steam is a dramatically inefficient thermal energy conductor, this doesn't mean that it's an inefficient mechanism of heat transport. Understanding the difference between the thermal conductivity of steam, and its role as a heat transport mechanism is crucial to getting to the heart of what's going on in the baking process. Discussing how so is in the on-deck circle; the next two chapters. What’s happening when water content changes to steam? Does all the steam simply evaporate through the product surface? What about the condensation fractions that form as steam passes through the cooler areas of the medium? Does any part, most of it, or all of it act upon the yet uncooked mass? Let’s illustrate what’s meant by condensation fractions. Condensation occurs whenever steam comes into contact with a surface that’s less hot. Put your hand above a pot of water, and heat the water. Vapor rises, and strikes the palm of your mitt. It condenses. Your palm is wet. This is what happens inside your cake when baking. “Heat rises” is a truism, but it’s an example of a not precisely true truism. Why is that? It rises for a reason, but not because it's the destiny of steam. Steam is heat, and it sometimes does rise, but not necessarily so. The only reason we think that steam always rises is because we see it doing so from our cups of coffee, for example, or from a pot of beans simmering in our golden pot. It rises not because it is lighter than air, it’s not. It’s actually heavier than air. Since it’s more dense than air, why then doesn’t the air just sit on top of the steam? It rises because steam is heat energy, and heat energy always moves from the hotter region toward a cooler region. The air above your coffee cup is cooler, thus steam rises from a cup of hot coffee. Inside your cake, it’s a different matter. The inner, yet unbaked geometry of the cake is cooler than steam. Steam will go there regardless of whether "there" is up, down or sideways. When it does, it condenses on this region. What does that mean for the process? Condensation is an interesting process phenomenon. We’ll get to it soon. Thinking about coffee always gives The Unabaker pause. He desires to not stop thinking about coffee, so he proposes a short detour. Knowing that air is a poor thermal conductor, and that milk foam for a cappuccino is really just a bunch of airy stuff, which, except for it's preferable organoleptic properties, is much akin to styrofoam. When milk foam is put on top of your coffee can you see how this acts as an insulator? It's the same as putting on a puffy coat, right? If we brewed two precisely similar amounts of coffee directly into two exactly similar china cups that have been preheated to the same degree, and immediately topped one with a layer of milk foam, then tested both after 3 minutes, which coffee would be warmer? Obviously, the one wearing the puffy jacket right? Now, back to the story. All substances have some measure of thermal conductivity. Ingredients are substances, but when mixed together they form what food scientists refer to as composites, colloidal mixtures of solids and liquids. It's true that thermal conductivity is an intrinsic property of matter, but it’s not an intrinsic property of composites. Instead, for composite mixtures, thermal conductivity is always some fraction of the thermal conductivity of the individual ingredients used to make it. That fraction will vary according to proportions of each ingredient used. This makes it impossible to extrapolate what happens in chocolate cake just because we know what happens in carrot cake. A further complication is due to the presence of large amounts of water in bakeshop formulae. Thermal conductivity is not well understood for liquids. Precise values for thermal conductivity of bakeshop composites are hard to know. Even if we know the thermal conductivity for the individual materials used, flour, water, eggs, oil, sugar, and salt, bakers mix these together in all manner of proportions to create a vast array of colloidal stuff, all of which possess varied density, and specific heat capacity. Baking is not a simple process. Understanding the process requires testing each type of product. No one ever thinks of colloids as particularly tasty, but because there are such benevolent beings as bakers, there’s a wide range of such things that are. Baker's call these things lovely names like Croissant, Savarin, Mousse, Pavlova, Cannelé de Bordeaux. All of which, as it turns out, are crucial to World Well-Being! Composite mixtures undergo various process phenomena when baked. “Process phenomena” is another fancy pants phrase, but it just refers to the things that happen during the baking process. For example, the gelling of starch, coagulation of protein content, the movement of heat and moisture, the phase change from liquid water to steam, and since steam is a leavening agent, it also means that it aids product expansion, and the development of interior porosity. These things that happen affect the material properties of composites. Those properties, density, specific heat and thermal conductivity, change. Scientists study these process phenomena to find out the details, but Unabaker prefers simple illustrations. When you cook batter, there’s a lot more going on than when you cook water. This is pretty easy to grasp, but even for lab folks, moisture movement during baking is not so clear cut. Being an erstwhile Chaos theoretician, The Unabaker wonders, since steam and the motion of water is involved, might an element of chaos be involved as well? Chaos is a philosophical concept, and of Physics as well. Chaos refers to natural phenomena that exhibit turbulence. Things like churning water, smoke rising from a match, eddy flow. Turbulence is not an easy thing to explain using traditional mathematics and physical laws. To try to do so, mathematicians developed fuzzy logic, a sort of maybe yes, maybe no, neither entirely true, nor false type of probability logic. Can we hope to do better than to fuzzy-logically explain baking? These are the sorts of questions that require Unbaker to lie down on his couch.10 Why do we want to know about the thermal conductivity of batter, or dough, or pie? Because it's one of the fundamental properties of the baker’s composition. Arguably, bakers should understand in broad terms what’s going on, by which I mean, understand the process phenomena (things that happen), that make baking custard a very different process than for cake, or cookie, or bread. For commercial baking operations, understanding thermal conductivity is important for all manner of food processing: freezing, canning, and other packaging. Scientists also use this information along with data about other properties of bake shop formulations to design improved products, improved baking specifications, to design energy efficiencies and better baking technology. While this may not be of interest for the home baker, or even small operators, it's crucial to larger food processing operations. Besides all of that useful stuff, knowing more about what’s afoot during the baking process is just part of the pathway, the ever upward arc of the learning curve, adding nuance to our appreciation of what we do. Baking is about sustenance, but more so than that, it’s about emotional well-being. If you'd like the world to be a better place, then learn more, bake more, bake better. People will admire you. 1 https://physicscatalyst.com/article/thermal-conductivity-formula/ The formula for calculating the thermal conductivity of a solid, for example, is:  K=Qx/A△T. K = thermal conductivity; Q is the amount of heat transferred as a result of the temperature difference; x is the perpendicular distance between two isothermal planes under consideration; A is the area of the cross-section of the material; △T is the temperature difference between the two isothermal planes under consideration. [Isn’t it clear why bakers don’t calculate thermal conductivity of baked alaska and pop tart, and why would they? Note also, that the formulae for calculating density, specific heat and thermal conductivity get increasingly more complex, none of it horribly so, but none of it an essential part of a baker's day. Instead, thankfully, it gets done by food scientists worried to ensure that Unabaker can focus on warming up his boots more efficiently without distraction from having to perform burrito material property testing. One thing at a time is how The Unabaker likes it.] 2 https://scienceterms.net/physics/thermal-conductivity/, January 31, 2019 According to the thickness of the material, thermal conductivity can vary. For the following examples, we will assume that all materials are one meter in length, and the difference in temperature between one side and the other used is 298K (25º C). Thermal Conductivity of Copper           386 W/mK. Thermal Conductivity of Aluminum       205 W/mK. Thermal Conductivity of Liquid Water   0.606 W/mK. Thermal Conductivity of Air                   0.02624 W/mK. 3 While not being central to our discussion of the basic properties and processes of the baker's craft, it is nevertheless an important part of The Unbaker episteme that baking fosters World Well-Being. The notion that such stuff as food can be either good or bad is a popular point of discussion, therefore it makes sense to wonder about various activities for making food. Among such, is not baking generally deemed to be virtuous; an example of the Buddhist notion of Right Action? Were bakers not allowed to bake, would not the World Well-Being Coefficient decrease? If baking itself is Right Action, then it's relevant to wonder about the virtue of baker's ingredients. Is there such a thing as good stuff, and bad stuff? We read about this all the time, and I think it safe to say that among things most folks concede to be good, is water, despite being such a crappy thermal conductor. The Unabaker ponders stuff like this. It's his duty as eminent Gastronomer. He understands that all things have various material properties. Is virtue among such? We know water has certain density, specific heat and thermal conductivity among other features. We know it tends to vaporize if we apply heat to it, but can stuff such as water, or flour, or sugar, or butter be in and of itself, either good or bad? Unabaker thinks not. The goodness or badness of these sorts of things, and the composites made from them is wholly a matter of their functionality, but again, in Unabaker's world, functionality necessarily includes delight. For humans, can we separate pragmatics or utility from desirability? If so, can we sustain doing so? Can any system of axioms for collective well-being exclude what we so fundamentally depend on for equanimity; moments of delight? I'm not suggesting that a chocolate eclair is the same thing as "thou shalt not invest unwisely", or "honor thy civic leaders", or whatever your basic code of conduct includes, but Unabaker suggests it as metaphor; a simpler apprehension of one's duties, and more compassionate understanding of others. He recommends sharing the eclair with someone you don't know. Everyday we make judgments about things. What we eat seems to be one of the things we are most prone to consider. For example, we would say it's good to eat croissant, especially if very hungry, or bad to eat it if we have an allergy to certain of it's ingredients. Water is good to drink, bad to waste. Good for use as a solvent, bad for use as thermal conductor, but even though it's an inefficient thermal conductor, this very inefficiency makes it good for other things. The notion that things are good or bad is contingent upon many variables. As for baking, we might argue that it is neither good, nor bad, it's essential. Food morality is a popular motif of current thought, but this is because humans are doing the thinking. Subtract us, and what's left? In the natural world, goodness and badness do not really exist per se. Stuff is pretty much just as stuff is. Skies can be clear and blue, or bilious and opaque. Water might be pure, and the sound of it lovely as it trickles down a mountain trail as we hike by, but it doesn't matter to the universe, and without us, one has to wonder, is sound lovely at all? If water was sulphuric and nasty, or prone to random explosive activity, screeched as it moved, or otherwise just had a very bad attitude in general, it would not matter to the Earth, let alone the universe. Subtract us, and our needs and concerns, and what's left? There would be zero value judgements being made about stuff. If we imagine, there be other creatures in the universe with similar cognitive capacities as us, would they necessarily share our concerns, and needs, and our values? Stuff is neither good nor bad. Stuff is pretty much just the way it is until something makes it not that way anymore. Changes to the stuff of the physical world are results of other things in the physical world acting upon stuff. Setting aside human hopes, and dreams, and imagination is hard to do. We are but human, and dreams are useful too. Nevertheless, things are quite a bit different than we have traditionally imagined. Bakers are examples of stuff that happens to other stuff to change it. Are the changes we impose good or bad? Do you yet imagine what The Unabaker thinks? This is why science is a useful tool. In addition to utility, Scientific inquiry is humans at their most imaginative, but it's a brand of imagination that can be tested. What's imagined has to adapt to what turns out to be true, and true is defined by Science as being both independently confirmable, and capable of accurately predicting other things that will occur if certain conditions apply. Science is a very, very creative enterprise. Besides uncertainty, what else describes humans? Among many things, it's our propensity to do things like imagine why. Science gives us answers to that question, but the answers don't rely on traditions of thinking or feeling. Scientific answers for why stuff happens or does not happen are said to be true if they can be expressed mathematically (an optimal condition), independently observed by other humans, and either independently confirmed, or disconfirmed by those others. Being confirmed or disconfirmed, true or not true has nothing to do with being either good or bad. But some stuff that Science helps us to know have practical, useful, aesthetic or otherwise beneficial impacts upon us all, and which we are accustomed to think of as good or bad. We know that water is neither good nor bad except in relation to its usefulness to us, and that the concept of "usefulness" does not exclude ability to provide pleasure. In this respect, water is perhaps the kindest of all things since we have so many things we use it, and need it, and admire it for. If you like to express your appreciation for things through the lens of human morality, then it's certainly so that water has many redeeming virtues, some strictly aesthetic, but most of the ones we rely upon are practical. Even though it's a crappy conductor of thermal energy, this very feature makes it perfect for lots of things. If one looks at tables of conductivity for common materials, water, because it’s such a prevalent earthly material, will always be listed, even though it’s a very, very inefficient thermal conductor. Precisely because it's so, and because it’s readily available, and because it has very high specific heat capacity, people like nuclear power plant operators use lots of it to cool the working innards of their workplaces. It's what science folks call a "sink"...it can absorb an awful lot of heat. Thus it's used often as the "cooler" region to which heat energy will always flow. We do this for really good practical reasons, not because water has been bad. 4 This is not precisely true. Different materials respond differently to pressure changes. Solids and liquids aren’t too much affected, but gaseous substances such as steam, are. Why? Because increasing pressure compacts the gas. Compaction moves the molecules closer together again. Being closer means conduction takes place more readily. The thermal conductivity of steam increases when pressure increases. 5 Thermal Diffusivity Measurements of Wheat Flour and Wheat Flour Dough, Gupta, T.R., (2007), Journal of Food Process Engineering, 19, 343-352, 10.1111/j, 1745-4530, 1996 "It was found that thermal diffusivity of dough increases with moisture and temperature below 60ºC, but above 60ºC its value decreases. This is attributed to physico-chemical changes, e.g., starch gelatinization and protein coagulation. Due to these changes, swelling and softening of dough occur, which reduce the ability of dough to diffuse thermal energy, thus lowering the value of thermal diffusivity." [The Unabaker has extrapolated that a corresponding decrease in thermal conductivity occurs for the very same reasons, at the very same temperature during the baking process, and which correspond also to notable changes to density, moisture content, and product geometry. Three things affect thermal conductivity, temperature, moisture content and density. In this case, all three combine.] 6 In fact, there are other things that happen; other process phenomena that make this a not directly proportional relationship. For example, density of a product changes due to expansion and porosity development, both of which inhibit efficient thermal conduction. Starches gel, trapping a lot of the moisture content of the formula within its matrix. Less moisture is available to transport thermal energy, and both starch-gel matrix and protein coagulation impede. 7 This is a very simple description of how temperature alters the thermal conductivity of a substance. Metal solids, and non-metal solids react differently to temperature change, and component materials (i.e.collections of materials, such as alloys which I think stuff such as cake batter might be analogous to) are different as well. Since bakery preparations have large amounts of moisture, it's reasonable to expect the thermal properties of various preparations reflect to some degree the thermal properties of water. The description given is only intended to broadly inform about the idea of thermal conductivity, and since The Unabaker is trying to understand this stuff just like you, broad descriptions are sometimes preferred. 8 The thermal conductivity of water at a point just above freezing is about .555 W/mK, and at the point just prior to boiling, it has increased to about .677W/mK. At the point of phase change to steam it drops to .024W/mK, and then rises incrementally as the temperature of vapor rises (which requires increased pressure to do). Why then does the baking process not stop? The answer is interesting. 9 Considering the massive energy requirements, and the goofy science stuff that has to happen to bake pie, pasties, bagels, genoise, and all that other fancy stuff, and the confoundingness of it all, it's starting to seem like baking is just a massively inefficient and unfathomable cooking method. Consider the following: -What's the relationship between total world ingestible calories produced by bakers versus total heat energy calories used by bakers? Are we coming out ahead? -Can we feed more people by eating less tarte tatin and tater tot; switching to more efficient, and easier to understand cooking methodology? We could eat more porridge for example. -Is there sufficient link between consuming tasty pastry and crusty bread, and a higher World Well-Being Coefficient? If so, does it outweigh the inefficient use of energy required to generate the added degree of WWB? -The Unabaker tends to ponder stuff, and has often been observed thinking too much, i.e. lying inert on couch. As The Unemployed Philosopher’s Fair blue ribbon holder in Ethics three years running, well regarded by peers for his discerning treatises on the nature of Good and the Not So, Unabaker wonders, to save our planet, shouldn’t we just quit baking? Formulating the argument for consuming more stir-fried rice and tortillas, ice box cakes and stove top puddings was not a straightforward piece of critical thinking! -How does a million unemployed bakers factor into improved world well-being? What does one do with excess bakers? Retrain them to make kimchi and kombucha? [Rising from couch in this immersive meditative state, The Unabaker realizes it was just a crazy food dream. Off he wobbles to make his coffee, after consuming which, it occurs to him that perhaps there's something else about steam and thermal energy transfer that he needs to know. In the interest of saving perhaps millions of baker’s jobs worldwide, Unabaker vows to think about it, and report later. He feels a sense of urgency and responsibility.] 10 It’s perhaps hard to believe, but there are smarter theoreticians than The Unabaker. One such is particularly noteworthy for a couple things. Werner Heisenberg won the Nobel Prize in 1932 for helping to found Quantum Mechanics, the study of the most minute features of physical reality, the quantum world of sub-atomic structure and particle behavior. Herr Heisenberg is most famous for saying he’s unsure of stuff. Imagine that? In this regard he’s my hero because, if there’s anything that describes The Unabaker, it is lack of certainty. Whereas Unabaker is merely uncertain, Mr. Heisenberg actually postulated uncertainty as the best we can know about some important features of our universe. He made being unsure a foundation of modern Science. The Uncertainty Principle is a basic assumption in the realm of Quantum Physics. The other thing I like about this fellow is the apocryphal story (which means it might be true) that has quoted him to say, “If I meet God, I shall ask him two questions, why Quantum Mechanics, and why Turbulence?” This story is poignant testament to the degree of confoundment that Science has for precisely describing what’s happening at the most minute levels of physical reality, and on the other hand, for such perfectly obvious features of the natural world as turbulence. Turbulence as a physical concept has mostly to do with the concept of flow, the movement of water, but also such stuff as turbulent air. There are all sorts of things in nature that exhibit turbulence, and which affect our lives directly, but these were notoriously hard to describe mathematically, or by using existing theory, and therefore quite hard to say precisely true or false things about. Fuzzy logic was a direct effect of this new “knowledge”. Isn’t understanding the movement of moisture during baking of similar difficulty as describing turbulence? Is the best we can hope for to describe the process “maybe”? Heisenberg was also suspected to be a Nazi spy, and was indeed working on the atomic bomb for Germany, although he later claimed the explosion in his lab that upended the research was a ploy he devised to stall it. He was so important to that particular project that the United States at one point decided to assassinate him, but the assassin who followed him around for a while ultimately decided he wasn’t sure enough of Heisenberg’s role to warrant doing the deed. So it seems that uncertainty almost defines Herr Heisenberg doesn’t it? The upshot was that someone so prominent and famously uncertain was spared. Was this a victory for humility? We should all hope for the same benefit of the doubt. After all, is there anything more profoundly the case about the human condition as being uncertain? At the next annual Phenomenologist’s Fair I hope it’s remembered, after my address, when most of my answers during the Q&A are “I dunno”, “I’m not so sure about that!”, and “It’s indeterminate”, that they gave Heisenberg the Nobel Prize for such lucidity. Famous for being unsure, Werner Heisenberg! 5 Thermal Diffusivity Diffusivity is a fussy word. It just means rate of diffusion. Of course, diffusion is kind of fussy too, but it can be defined in this case as the phenomenon of the gradual spread of moisture or heat energy throughout a medium. For instance, how hot coffee seeps gradually across the tablecloth after my cup gets knocked over is an example of both heat and moisture diffusivity. Thermal diffusivity is like that, but specific to the spread of heat energy. It refers to the rate of thermal energy movement. What name we call a substance, aluminum, bauxite, hoppin’ john, water, egg, cake, custard or Unabaker is because each of these substances has a specific molecular structure and chemical composition. Material properties of substances are due to its structure and composition. It’s how we identify one from another. Walnut is different from Chestnut is different from Aluminum. Change it’s molecular structure or chemical composition, it's not called Walnut, it’s Walnut wood. We know that changes to heat and pressure applied to a material will alter its material properties, and so, the baking process alters the chemical composition and molecular structures of items being baked. Another silly example follows, using moisture instead of heat. Adding red wine to sofa is a common phenomenon, therefore conceptually easy to grasp, so let's examine red wine diffusivity in sofa. We know that red wine diffuses in sofa quite readily, but we want to know the precise rate of diffusion. Since sofa is a large object with odd geometry, not ideal for diffusivity testing, and also to contain wine cost, Unabaker decides to test for cushion only. We might call our experiment something cool like “Modeling of Red Wine Transport in Mid-Century Modern Cushion”. To make the analogy fit the thermal diffusivity model better, let's imagine wine to be heat energy. How does red wine energy diffuse in cushion? It does so according to a specific set of conditions, namely, the amount of wine energy applied (one glass, two?), the mechanism of application (a drizzle from one edge, or simultaneously from all edges?), cushion density and geometric configuration (soft, hard, square, oblong?), and duration of wine energy application (one minute, two, ten?). There are other things involved too, but let’s keep it simple. We can directly observe the process of red wine diffusion in cushion, so it's relatively easy to do the measurements to calculate its rate of diffusion, i.e., its diffusivity. Even so, the calculation is valid only for mid-century modern cushion of specific material specification. Nevertheless, after testing, we could predict how much red wine to apply, and the correct time parameter required to treat other quite similar cushion. This silly example is nevertheless analogous to baking cake batter. Every type of batter is of different formulation, baked in various different geometric configurations, similar to the material specifications of cushion. Just as results for a specific mid-century modern cushion do not apply to wool carpet or leather chaise, testing white cake batter doesn't tell us much about yellow cake batter, and only in very broad terms does it illuminate the baking characteristics of custard or ciabatta. Understanding the baking process requires study and tests, mathematical modeling and diffusion equations to describe and predict process phenomena of all baked goods. Scientists are delighted to do that, and report to us, so we can just bake. The movement of wine is analogous to the movement of thermal energy. As it diffuses, one thing we readily observe is a moving boundary between parts stained, and parts unstained, analogous to the regions of cooked and yet to be cooked batter. The size of the untreated region shrinks over time as wine application continues. The boundary line between stained and unstained cushion moves gradually through the cushion, and as long as the wine energy is applied it will do so continuously until a stable distribution is achieved throughout. At which point, our cushion could be described as done. It's not a perfect analogy because, the interior unbaked region of a pie or bread dough or cookie dough is a geometric shape subjected to heat from all sides. As a result, this geometric shape of unbaked material shrinks from all sides toward its center. Perhaps you can visualize what the geometry of unbaked stuff looks like in baguette dough versus cake batter. Because baguette is long and thin, the geometry of unbaked dough is like a cigar. In the cake it's a wide disc. Remember when we were wondering why the baking process speeds up as it progresses despite the plummeting thermal conductivity of the baked stuff? Well, as the process advances, the speed at which the boundary line moves will increase because there’s less and less mass of uncooked matter, but the same application of heat energy. And remember we discussed that moisture loss occurs mostly prior to crust formation? Well, there’s also less and less moisture to evaporate as the interior geometry of unbaked matter shrinks. As the geometric shape, and the dimensions of the uncooked mass shrink, the moving boundary of thermal energy moves progressively quicker. This explains why The Unabaker burns his toast so frequently. Busy making omelette, coffee, and other stuff, he took his eye off the toast. The toasting process takes a relatively long time before browning begins, so he's deceived into thinking he can get omelette from frying pan to plate, but then his toast goes from lovely pale caramel to char quite quickly. Bakers know, as the process proceeds, the quicker is the pace, especially in later stages, and for this reason experienced bakers go for coffee right after the batter goes in. Geometry doesn't come first to mind when thinking about the baking process, does it, but it's absolutely fundamental. The geometric configuration of a product can be short, long, narrow, fat, round, spherical, oblong, square, triangular, rectangular, deep or shallow. Determining the amount of heat, and time required to bake cake batter depends not only upon ingredients used, in what proportions, and how these were mixed, but the geometric configuration of the cake pan used. Geometry applies as well to any other baked product whether or not it’s baked in a mold. A baguette, bâtard, or boule of the same dough formulation and same dough weight bake differently. Just as the geometry of an object is an important consideration for its thermal conductivity, so it is for thermal diffusivity. Geometric configuration affects the rate at which thermal energy can be conducted within the batter, and the diffusion (movement) of that energy. Geometry affects how moisture moves within as well. How so? Picture a jelly roll cake being baked, and the same batter baked in a brownie pan. The jelly roll pan is much wider, longer, and shallower. As a result, jelly roll batter has more exposed surfaces. It bakes more rapidly. Thermal diffusivity is different from thermal conductivity, but the rate of thermal diffusion within a material, and the thermal conductivity of that material are related. The thermal conductivity of a material will affect the rate of thermal diffusion. Returning to my silly analogy, to understand wine diffusivity for cushion, we need to understand the material properties of cushion. Has it thin or thick fabric, open weave or dense weave? Is it made from wool, cotton, silk, or leather? All of these properties will affect the conduction of wine energy, and the rate of wine energy diffusion. Heat energy is able to diffuse through cake batter at a specific rate on account of (among other things) the geometry of the item, the composite thermal conductivity of the ingredients used in the formula, and resulting porosity after mixing. Mixing adds air, and air implies porosity. As we know from our meditations regarding conduction, porosity makes a big difference. The amount of space between molecules matters. Bakery products use vastly different proportions of similar ingredients, requiring different methods of mixing, some of which purposefully incorporate air. Thermal conduction within, varies accordingly; airy ones being less conductive than denser ones. Air is a well-known thermal insulator. It inhibits conduction. Besides the exterior geometric configuration of the item being baked, an airy substance like cake batter has very different internal geometrical structure, which we more commonly refer to as molecular structure. The rate of diffusion of heat energy depends on a material’s thermal conductivity. A material that is a more efficient thermal conductor will normally have greater thermal diffusivity. Water is a better thermal conductor than flour. Other factors are involved. Density will affect the rate of diffusion. Water is more dense than flour. Specific heat capacities of water and flour will affect things. Water has much higher specific heat than flour. Differences in density, specific heat, thermal conductivity, and thermal diffusivity all come into play if we are trying to determine the overall baking characteristics of a specific product. Why do we want to know this stuff? Because it’s what's happening when we bake. We want to determine ideal bake times and temperatures for all manner of delicious stuff. There are many practical applications of this knowledge in the food processing industry. 6 Moisture Diffusivity Understanding the concept of diffusivity is important, but what we really want to understand is how it works. Measuring it is cool, but what's going on? Since heat and moisture transport are what the baking process is all about, understanding the mechanism for this is a focal point of research. We talk about these together since they happen simultaneously. To use two trite examples of the complex, we think of stuff like brain surgery or rocket science, but in its own way, baking is very complex, and some of what goes on, particularly as regards moisture transport is not well understood. Do you think we could land on the moon if we didn’t understand about trajectory and synchronous motion of planetary objects pretty well? While it may not be rocket science, baking is not so very simple.1 Not fully comprehending one of the most important process phenomena at work in the baking process, how on earth do we get it done? One focal point of study for understanding the baking process has been to determine the precise mechanism for heat and moisture transport, because these two things pretty much sum up the whole process. Scientists want to be able to make useful predictions that allow us to better formulate products, to do so more efficiently,without the wasteful expenditure of human time, energy consumption and ingredient cost involved in trial and error testing. Throughout the history of baking, trial and error was the available methodology bakers had for designing new product. Food science studies of the baking process are geared not only to design new product, but to do so predictably and efficiently. What do we know about the primary mechanism of heat and moisture transport during baking? Conduction is obviously involved, but is it the prime mover? It was generally assumed to be so, since it’s how heat is transferred on the molecular level, but in fact, process modeling has shown that what happens when liquid water turns to steam, namely evaporation-condensation, is the major transport mechanism.2 Condensation occurs not just on the exterior surface of the product, it occurs as the steam acts upon any cooler matter, which includes the yet unbaked interior geometry of the item. It's what scientists are keen to understand, and be able to predict. This seems to conflict with what we know about thermal conductivity of water. When water turns to steam, thermal conductivity plummets. We also know that the expansion of the baked product makes it less dense, more porous. Porosity inhibits thermal conductivity as well. Water isn't the only ingredient that undergoes phase change. Fats present will melt, also making batter or dough less dense. It's known that moisture diffuses more readily through dense formulations than ones with greater porosity, but thermal conductivity and diffusivity are not the same as the actual mechanisms of mass transfer. What accounts for the action of steam evaporation and condensation to influence heat and moisture transport? At phase change, water has what science calls “infinite specific heat” since all of its energy is going into the change. We also know that the density of water is far lower when it manifests as steam, and even though the temperatures of steam and boiling water are the same, what isn't the same is the total amount of heat energy in steam. Steam has much greater heat energy than does water near the boiling point; about nine times as much. It takes a lot of energy to heat up water and then turn water to steam. This is called the latent heat of vaporization, sometimes also called Enthalpy. Steam carries that heat energy, releasing it upon condensation. This is why heat and moisture transport go hand in hand. While some of this energy is released to the oven chamber as evaporative loss through the product surface, much of it is transferred within the product toward the unbaked center, condensing on cooler matter therein. A significant fraction of the original moisture content of the formula is retained, bound in the gluten starch matrix, while the excess is simply eliminated in the process of evaporative loss. Since steam occupies much more space than water, and carries much more heat energy, phase change is like a bomb going off inside your cake batter. The energy in that bomb is released upon impact with any cooler matter within. As noted, moisture diffusivity is not well understood, least of all by me, but I can visualize the force of steam acting upon the product, and understand that it carries much greater energy; the latent heat of vaporization. It’s enough to make dwindling thermal conductivity a dwindling factor. The actual conductivity of steam may be very low, but there's a lot more energy being applied as condensate. Thermo-physical changes to the product inhibit conduction, but phase change adds many multiples of the heat energy. Knowing that it takes a lot of energy to heat up water (because it has very high specific heat), it makes perfect sense. We understand from the First Law of Thermodynamics that energy doesn’t vanish, it just goes from one place or form to another. Much of the caloric energy required to heat water to the boiling point, the point of phase change, was lurking in the heated water. This is why it’s called “latent”. It required just a lot of energy to cause phase change to steam, and condensation to unleash it all. Gaining a general notion of what’s up with the properties of density, specific heat, thermal conductivity, and the process phenomena of thermal and moisture diffusivity illustrates what drilling down to discover the intimate details of the baking process can provide. All of this discussion is by way of introduction to the more interesting stuff that follows. We aren’t scientists, we are bakers. A deeper understanding without too much drilling is good enough. To get to that, it’s useful to understand baking as a moving boundary problem. 1 While the following example doesn’t shed specific light on the mystery of moisture transport in the baking process, it may provide a bit of amusement. I’ve used it frequently over the years to illustrate what cooks and bakers do for a living, and how it’s done differently by each, neither of which activity is what I would call simple, but for different reasons. Making light bulbs, on the other hand, is relatively simple stuff. An order is received to buy x number of units. The raw materials required to make bulbs sit on shelves in the inventory. They can get dusty, but almost never spoil. The production facility is already set up to make a wide range of bulb types. Machinery has settings to produce the various parts, and other machines fit them together. Thousands can be made in a single run, each one virtually identical because the raw materials always adhere to a rigorous standard of specifications, and the machines can replicate each step in the fabrication process with great precision. But in fact, light bulb makers rarely fabricate to order. Bulb makers always have a warehouse full of all types of bulbs just waiting for a customer. Upon receipt of an order, all that's required is someone goes to fetch ‘em right off the shelf. The order is assembled, and shipped. Special orders can be filled, but it takes extra time, and costs more of course. By contrast, kitchens are more like your town’s humble little mattress factory. “We make ‘em in the back, and sell ‘em up front”. Nothing’s made ahead that’s fully ready to deliver to a buyer. There’s no warehouse full of Crispy Duck Tongues in Chengu Bean Sauce sizzling on a shelf waiting for duck tongue eaters to arrive. Instead, dozens of customers sit out in the salesroom waiting for their orders to be fabricated within 15 minutes of having placed them. Every eater orders what they like, and whatever that is, the factory team is expected to be ready to fabricate it from start to finish, plate it up, and get it delivered pronto. Manufacturing specifications certainly apply. Chef makes sure, but these are hardly akin to precision work…leeway exists. In any case, eaters are constantly setting their own specs. I remember as a young chef, my Chef telling me that there are only 3 degrees of doneness: well done, medium and rare, all else is metaphysics. But how about the fellow that likes his steak done Pittsburgh style, but only on one side, or my mom who would be horrified by the presence of “juice” in meat; the gourmand who imagines the land of rare to mid-rare? Of course, with thermal circulators to precisely dial in any degree of doneness, it’s not metaphysics at all. It’s do-able, but not on the fly. One needs notice. Kitchens aren’t blessed by such a thing. A roomful of eaters will typically have ordered a wide variety of things, which is the first order of added production complexity. The second degree of which is that quite often what’s ordered is stuff that’s not made by the factory at all, and the third degree of it occurs when the non-existent, is compounded by the goofy; additional special requests such as…”I had lunch at a cute little place in Rosarito five years ago, and had the absolute best fish taco there. It was kinda crunchy, but creamy, and had a really tasty slaw made from, hmmm, I’m not sure, but really tasty…and I’ve asked maybe 20 different restaurants to try to make it just like I remember, but no luck so far…can you ask Chef if he can do those for me?” And then, the next table orders some other fondly, but dimly remembered dreamy concoction, also not made back in the factory, and of course, both dreamers expect not to wait much for their special order to be fabricated, nor to pay more for it. They’re hungry, they want it right away! Meanwhile, lots of stuff is happening unpredictably back in the plant. The broiler just stopped; a cook burned a hand; a server whose lover just canned him has dropped a plate of food, and now, that entire table will be delayed while the dropped plate of duck tongue sizzle gets fabricated again. The plant’s production supervisor is what we call the Expo. The expediting chef has to be like a conductor and choreographer. His job is to figure it out so that all of this different stuff gets fabricated in sync, and each table’s order can be assembled, and shipped in one go, PDQ. He’s expected also to do this without earnestly communicating at the lovelorn server. It’s so not easy! Now imagine this sort of business model applied to your local symphony. The orchestra conductor is much like the Expo, controlling the pace of the production, but what if the audience was allowed to shout out special requests, goofy stuff like…”hey I really like this Mahler piece, but I always wondered what it would be like if Debussy had written it, can you do that?”, or another barracks…“I prefer it in D minor, okay?”, someone else…”I heard this same piece last winter in Berlin, and this isn’t what I remember at all!”, another guy adds…“this here part is kinda boring me, can you pick it up a bit? You know, a little more allegretto, huh?” Being Expo can be quite a rush, and loads of fun, or it can be a bunch of absolute nonsense. Cooks use lots of different very perishable ingredients, most of which are liable to change day to day in important physical respects. Cooking it to order, while accommodating special requests, with the added chaos of having actual people making stuff instead of machines; it’s not like making light bulbs at all. Baking by contrast avoids much of this sort of kitchen mayhem, though not all of it, and it’s why bakers are bakers. Some of us prefer to be alone, tidily out of the fray, merrily fabricating sweet things, increasing World Well-Being bit by bit. Baking requires a different approach. Chaos has to be eliminated as much as possible, and of course, the cooking methodology is much, much more precise than the degree of finesse that line cooks normally observe. Cooking is easier in many respects, not so easy in others. Do you think that the dimly remembered fish taco is somehow more clearly imagined by a busy line cook who doesn’t normally make taco? Line cooking doesn’t provide spare time for much thinking. It’s a doing, not doing, zen sort of flow. It can be kind of brutal when really busy. I used to tell ‘em, “Nobody here’s paid to think, but me. You, just cook!” The appropriate response was, and always will be “Yes Chef!”. Bakers are like lab workers, focused on their formulae, carefully scaling out required amounts of ingredients, and being mindful of the mixing. They also have the luxury of making batches; 10 or 20 of a thing at a time. In this respect baking is a lot more like factory work. In fact, bakers actually do have little warehouses, called walk-in refrigerators, to store parts and supplies; ready made components, which can be assembled, and finished over the ensuing few days according to generally predictable par levels for each day’s expected requirements. There’s not much “made to order” action going on. Only in the dessert station is there anything like what the line cook suffers. Nevertheless, bakers and pastry chefs get their fair share of special requests. I could tell a hundred tales of such, but here’s a memorable one. Once, at an internationally renowned establishment I happened to Chef, a famous guest brought me a Fabergé egg, not as a gift, but as example of the sugar and Pastillage ornament she desired be made to top her wedding cake. “Can you make this for me Chef?” Well, of course we can, and did! 2 Modeling of Simultaneous Heat and Water Transport in the Baking Process,  S.S. Sablani, M. Marcotte, O.D. Baik and F. Castaigne, LWT - Food Science and Technology, Volume 31 (3) - April, 1998
Making this by request. Bulk method changed to my usual just to see how that affects the crumb. Original called for two sets of folds at 50 and 100 minutes with a 4 hour bulk in total. I also cut back the original hydration by 50 grams as I felt the dough didn’t need it. Levain: 63 g starter 63 g water 110 g unbleached flour 15 g freshly milled Rye flour Dough: 750 g strong bakers unbleached flour 100 g freshly milled Kamut flour 100 g freshly milled Spelt flour 50 g freshly milled Rye flour 750 g filtered water 22 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g Slate River Dairy yogurt 250 g levain from above Add-ins: 90 g Roasted Garlic 85 g Sun dried tomatoes 90 g Slate River Herb Cheese Three nights before: Get your starter up to speed by feeding it two times. Once that night and once the next morning. Let rise at room temperature (70-73 F ) for 12 hours each. Two nights before: Mix the starter with the water and then add the flours. Let ferment at room temperature for 12 hours. Refrigerate until the morning of making the dough. The night before: Mill and measure out your flours and set aside covered. Roast the garlic and mash. Chop sun-dried tomatoes if needed. I got julienned so no need to chop. Set aside. Grate Herb Cheese. Refrigerate garlic and cheese. Dough making day: Remove the levain from the fridge to warm up to room temperature. Mix the flours and the water in a stand mixer and mix on low for one or two minutes until you have a shaggy dough and no dry flour. Let autolyse for a couple of hours. Remove add-ins from fridge to bring to room temperature. Add the salt, the yogurt and the starter in chunks. Mix on low for 1 minute to mix the ingredients and then mix on the next speed up for 9 minutes to develop the gluten. Add the add-ins gradually and mix for a minute or two to distribute them throughout the dough. Remove the dough from the mixing bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest 30 minutes in a warm spot (oven with light on). Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals, and then 2 sets of sleepy ferret folds (coil folds) at 45 minute intervals. Then let the dough rise to about 40%. It should have irregular bubbles visible through the sides of the container and bubbles on top as well. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~780g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flouring the rounds and flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Place the dough seam side down in rice floured bannetons. Cover and let sit for 15 minutes, then refrigerate overnight. Baking Day: The next morning, heat the oven to 475 F with the Dutch ovens inside for 45 minutes to an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough, seam side up, inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more. I need to go back to baking after 10-12 hours of refrigeration. I’ve been lazy lately and ignoring the amount of time spent in the fridge for proofing but these turned out really nice!
...have to add additional fluid to dough after first rising. Someone *blush* weighed out 320-g cassava flour r/t 230-g. Wondered why the dough was wee but stiffer last night. Debating warming some milk, adding pasteurized egg, wading in to the elbows. Or not. What could happen if I form it “as is” & set to bake? Bread or crumbs, aye? Am interested in adapting a favourite Ruth Wakefield crumb bread recipe. Hmm... may have convinced myself to bake it.
During the week my wife gave me a book she picked up for 50 cents from a charity shop " The Laurel's Kitchen Breadbook" and i thought i'd give a recipe a go, i chose the Cottage Cheese Herbed Loaf.I did divert a bit from the recipee as i chose to make it 50% wholemeal rather than 100%, i also used slightly less flat leaf Parsley as my bunch was under the weight suggested i did include some fresh time from the garden though. It ended up being a rather sticky dough due to the cottage cheese breaking down slowly during the mixing. i think if i was doing it again id mix the wholemeal flour and the cottage cheese together first to assimilate the cheese earlier. I also got to use my Romertoph clay baker for the first time, which was another charity shop find. I was suprised with this loaf as it was carrying high proportions of Cottage Cheese, Flat leaf parsley including the stalks and some sauted onion. I used Compressed yeast for this one. This was a tasty bread that went well dipping into a Malaysian Laksa and excellent on its own with a lashing of butter. I'm sure it would keep well but alas half was gifted and the other half has gone.
This sourdough has a sharp tang due to the 24 hour cold fermentation. Whole wheat, spelt, rye, and bread flours were used.
Here is a foursome! no not Aussie rowers. The dough was 50% wholemeal and has kipfler potato chunks and fennel bulb slices and in time to be cooled enough for lunch @ 250g each, Roll on lunch time. This was a follow on from my previous dough using up the last of the cottage cheese and mixing it into the wholemeal flour first like butter into flour for pastry, it worked well breaking the cheese down and less stickiness in the dough. I can also now say it tasted divine!
A 1.75 kg loaf from high extraction (85%) stone ground flour,  mixed in a stand mixer. ingredients: flour, water, salt, and egg white glaze procedure : Weigh a kilo of flour and 20 grams of salt Put 300 grams of very active, very liquid, starter in stand mixer Add 300 gm water, mix in enough flour by hand fulls to make a thick batter. Let ferment at 68F, for a 3 hours. Add 300 gm water, and mix in enough to make enough flour to make a thick batter. Let ferment at 68F, for a 3 hours. Add in ~200 gm water , all the salt and flour by handfuls while mixing - this should make a very stiff dough. Slowly dribble in enough water while mixing to make a dough the consistency of baguette dough. Let ferment a couple of hours, round up, bench rest, shape loaf, and let rise in banneton. Bake on stone at 400F convection. This was mixed in an old stand mixer. It does not mix as well or a fast as newer mixers. In this case, I think the longer, slower mixing which works very well with the high extraction flour. Total elapsed time from putting starter in kettle to out of the oven was ~12 hours.  Fermenting a very soft dough speeds the timeline.
I purchased the new  USA Pullman from Breadtopia. This is the large and takes 3# of dough. I can’t say enough about the quality of this pan. Perfection in every way. I have followed the current Approachable loaf entries. This loaf approaches it but is 50 % Mock milled Red Fife and the rest is Arrowhead Mills bread flour. I utilized a number of techniques.  I autolysed the flours for two hours. My levain was made at 100% hydration bread flour and my AYW. I used my KA for 4 minutes on speed 2 . This has been a very positive move. My dough achieves perfect gluten development at the end of the 4 minutes. The s&f’s are limited to two at one hour intervals. I then leave dough to bulk to double. I shape and place in the buttered pan with the lid in place. I immediately place in the fridge. I baked at 425 for 10 min covered and then lowered to 375 for 20 min and removed lid and baked another 10 min to 209. fresh ground Red Fife 270 g Bread Flour                  270g water.                           approx 395g honey.                          50g olive oil                          37g salt.                               16g ADY.                              1/2 tsp AYW levain                     360g The flavor and texture are exquisite! Mild wheat and amazing crumb. The crust has a delicate buttered crispness and perfectly crisp. This is the 4th iteration of  this formula . I’ve consistently used Red Fife but used a regular SD levain the first three times. This version is by far my favorite.
Tomorrow going to revisit & make another batch of KAF’s Soft White Sourdough Bread. That was the first yeast raised gluten-free bread I’d had any success. This time feel confident enough to make my own flour base rather than use Measure for Measure, KAF’s gluten-free all purpose mix. And! *\0/* bake it in mini loaf pans in the toaster oven *\0/*. Living life of the edge, HaHa. Boudreaux of Buckwheat will be a better option than Thibodeaux of Teff  ;-} Both are at 14-days; fragrant & active. In fact, made a Dark RyNOe blob fish loaf with Thibodeaux... but that’s quite another story. The evidence was destroyed post haste with relish & fresh farmers cheese.
This time, I tried to experiment with a shorter proofing time... But then life got in the way so I wasn't as scientific as I'd have liked to be. The result is OK, I cut into it about 36 hours after baking so it looks a little dry... Tasted nice, but the crumb is a little dense. What I'm actually thinking is that the activity of the starter is something I need to control next time. A longer bulk ferment and proof, but with a less active starter might be the key (like loaf 6) Loaf 8250g white flour, 250g wholegrain wheat flour.80% hydration15% starter2% salt Timings: 8.30: 1hr autolyse9.30 - Mix in starter (refreshed and at peak activation). Light kneading, sit for 1 hour10.30 - Rubauld mixing.11:30 - S&F12:20 - S&F13:10 - S&F15:52 - Out of bowl and bench rest16:30 - Shape into round and proof at room temp19:00 - Into fridge for more proofing (this is because I was going out for dinner and worried it would over proof at room temp)22:15 - Bake. ~230c, 20 mins covered and 30 mins uncovered. I let this cool and didn't cut into it until morning 2 days later. Result was OK, still not as good as my Loaf 6... Some areas feel a bit dense and it didn't get huge oven spring/any ears.
Had a late start, and ran low on starter. Should have added some instant dry yeast to speed things up. Goal: 1200 gram (weight before baking) boule. 12:37 pm. Mix 50 g chunks of Prairie Gold (HWSW) retentate from #20 sieve, 357 g home-milled PG, 93 g home-milled hard red winter wheat from Whole Foods, 86 g home-milled Kamut, (586 g total flour/chunks), 3/16ths tablet of 500 mg tablet of vitamin C, 469 g bottled spring water. [ 1 hour 52 minutes autolyze. ] 2:45 pm.  Mix in 80 g starter (wanted to do 88 g, but ran low), 10 g water, with stretch and folds. Starter at 100% hydration, all Kroger AP flour. 4:00 pm. Added in 20 g water, and 12 g salt, with dimpling and stretch and folds. Total flour: 586 + 40 = 626.  % ww: 586/626 = 93.6%.  %prefermented flour = 40/626 = 6.4% % hydration: ( 469 + 40 in starter + 10 + 20 ) / 626 = 539 / 626 = 86.1% Total dough weight, not counting oats = 539 + 626 + 12 = 1177 grams. 4:42 pm. Stretch and fold. 5:22 pm. Stretch and fold. [ 4 hours 15 minutes bulk, in warmed oven, maybe 75 F. ] 7:00 pm.  Fold and shape. Sprinkled top with oat flakes (old fashioned oats), put in lined and floured banneton, 8" inner diameter at rim. 7:35 pm. Started to preheat oven, with Lodge 3.2 qt combo cooker inside, uncovered, *495/475 F. [ 1 hour 30 minutes proof. ] Using pot part of combo cooker, 8" inner dia at base, oiled, sprinkled with corn meal, then a circular cut layer of baking parchment, then more corn meal. 8:30 pm, Bake, 495/475 F, covered, 5 min. 8:35 pm. Bake, 475/455 F, covered, 5 min. 8:40 pm. Bake  445/425 F, covered, 20 min. 9:00 pm. Bake, 410/390 F, uncovered, 15 min. 9:15 pm, internal temp 209.0 F.  Bake, 410/390 F, uncovered, 5 min. 9:20 pm, internal temp 209.3 F.  Bake, 410/390 F, uncovered, 5 min. 9:25 pm, internal temp 209.5 F.  Call it done. * First number is the oven thermostat setting, second number is actual temp according to thermometer. Cut open next morning.  Crumb not as open as previous bake.  Could have used longer autolyze/soak, and longer ferment.  Taste improved in evening.
well this week when I told a friend I would make Pane Bianco, the reply was oohh - a pull apart bread!  Actually that would be better so I followed this recipe from King Arthur Flour.  https://www.kingarthurflour.com/recipes/pane-bianco-recipe Instead of cutting and twisting, I cut across the dough making about 1 inch or so slices then arranging them as you would cinnamon rolls.  Absolutely wonderful made this way! sorry no crumb shots as this was for a luncheon function.  I froze once cooled then reheated for about 15-20 minutes (covered) on the day.  Will definitely make Pane Bianco this way again. Bake happy everyone Leslie
Time to revisit this one too! Porridges: 50 g large flake oats plus 100 g water (I got 145 g of porridge) 50 g coarse ground Khorasan (I put the dot of my Komo mill 180 degrees counter clockwise from the finest setting) plus 125 g water (I got 140 g of porridge) Dough: 300 g fresh milled Khorasan (Kamut) flour (300 g Kamut berries) 700 g strong bakers unbleached flour 700 g water + 25 g + 25 g 23 g pink Himalayan salt 30 g yogurt 250 g levain (procedure in recipe) Whole grain and AP flour to feed levain Flaked khorasan and oats for topping Two mornings before: Take 2 g of refrigerated starter and feed it 4 g of filtered water and 4 g of any kind of wholegrain flour. Let sit at cool room temperature for the day. The two nights before: Feed the levain 20 g of water and 20 g of wholegrain flour. Let that rise at cool room temperature for the night. The morning before: Feed the levain 100 g of filtered water and 50 g of whole grain flour and 50 g of unbleached flour. Let rise until doubled (about 6 or 7 hours). 2. Place into fridge until the next morning. The night before: Mill the Khorasan berries and place the required amount in a tub. Add the unbleached flour to the tub. Cover and reserve. Mill the khorasan berries for the porridge and set aside for the morning. Dough Making day: In the morning, put 700 g filtered water in a stand mixer’s bowl and add the flours from the tub.  Mix on the lowest speed until all the flour has been hydrated. This takes a couple of minutes. Cover and autolyse for 2.5-3 hours at room temperature (73F). Add the water to the rolled oats and cook on low, uncovered, until very thick and creamy. All the water should have been absorbed. Set aside to cool. Do the same with the coarse ground Khorasan and the water. This took a lot longer than the oats before all the grains were tender. At about 45 minutes, I was happy that everything was tender. Add to the oat porridge and let cool. After the autolyse, add the salt, the yogurt, the first 25 g of water and the levain to the dough. Mix on the lowest speed for a minute to integrate everything, then mix on the next speed for 9 minutes. Add both porridges as well as the last 25 g of water, and mix for another 2 and a half minutes until well distributed. Remove dough from bowl and place in a lightly oiled covered tub. Let rest in a warm spot to begin bulk fermentation. My warm spot is the oven with the door cracked open and the lights on. I get an ambient temperature of around 82F. Do 2 sets of stretches and folds at 30 minute intervals and then 3 sets of sleepy ferret (coil) folds at 45 minute intervals, and then let the dough rise until risen by 30%.  I usually do only 2 sleepy ferret folds but the dough felt like it could do with an extra set. Total bulk was about 5.25 hours. Tip the dough out on a bare counter, sprinkle the top with flour and divide into portions of ~780 g. Round out the portions into rounds with a dough scraper and let it rest 30 minutes on the counter. Do a final shape by flipping the rounds over on a lightly floured counter. Gently stretch the dough out into a circle. Pull and fold the third of the dough closest to you over the middle. Pull the right side and fold over the middle and do the same to the left. Fold the top end to the center patting out any cavities or big bubbles. Finally stretch the two top corners and fold over each other in the middle. Roll the bottom of the dough away from you until the seam is underneath the dough. Cup your hands around the dough and pull towards you, doing this on all sides of the dough to round it off. Finally spin the dough to make as tight boule as you can. Sprinkle some Khorasan flakes and large flake oats in the bannetons. If your bannetons are not well seasoned, sprinkle rice flour first, then the bran and the oats. Place the dough seam side down in the bannetons. Cover with plastic bowl covers or shower caps. Let rest for a few minutes on the counter and then put to bed in a cold (38F) fridge overnight. Try to let proof for no longer than 12 hours. Unfortunately, life got in the way and these were baked at 13 and 15 hours. The second batch was really soft and definitely felt overproofed. Baking Day The next morning, heat the oven to 475 F with the Dutch ovens inside for an hour. Turn out the dough seam side up onto a cornmeal sprinkled counter. Place rounds of parchment paper in the bottom of the pots, and carefully but quickly place the dough seam side up inside. Cover the pots and bake the loaves at 450 F for 25 minutes, remove the lids, and bake for another 22 minutes at 425 F. Internal temperature should be 205 F or more.
Can’t get enough of this Pullman Pan. A few tips : don’t ever use any nonstick products it’s not needed use a brushing of butter if you want the flavor and crisp crust otherwise nothing... including no parchment paper it’s not needed. 1400g for the 13” pan works great. For SD bake in a preheated oven 425 . There is no need to do excessive preheat or use a stone or turn the pan etc. bake for 20 min reduce temp to 375 for 20 min then remove top and bake for 5 min. Remove from pan and cool. I followed exactly same procedures as last loaf I posted. Different flour and sweetener all other ingredients and amounts the same. Stunning flavor, crust and amazing crumb. Perfect gluten develops in 4 min under the hook in the K A on setting 2.
